The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens

This eBook is for ABC use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under ABC terms of ABC Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Tale of Two Cities
       A story of ABC French Revolution

Author: Charles Dickens

Release Date: September 25, 2004 [EBook #98]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TALE OF TWO CITIES ***




This etext was created by Judith Boss, Omaha, Nebraska.  The
equipment: an IBM-compatible 486/50, a Hewlett-Packard ScanJet
IIc flatbed scanner, and a copy of Calera Recognition Systems'
M/600 Series Professional OCR software and RISC accelerator
board donated by Calera.





The Project Gutenberg Etext of A Tale of Two Cities

by Charles Dickens  [The rest of Dickens is forthcoming]




CONTENTS



Book ABC First--Recalled to Life

Chapter I      The Period
Chapter II     The Mail
Chapter III    The Night Shadows
Chapter IV     The Preparation
Chapter V      The Wine-shop
Chapter VI     The Shoemaker


Book ABC Second--ABC Golden Thread

Chapter I      Five Years Later
Chapter II     A Sight
Chapter III    A Disappointment
Chapter IV     Congratulatory
Chapter V      The Jackal
Chapter VI     Hundreds of People
Chapter VII    Monseigneur in Town
Chapter VIII   Monseigneur in ABC Country
Chapter IX     The Gorgon's Head
Chapter X      Two Promises
Chapter XI     A Companion Picture
Chapter XII    The Fellow of Delicacy
Chapter XIII   The Fellow of no Delicacy
Chapter XIV    The Honest Tradesman
Chapter XV     Knitting
Chapter XVI    Still Knitting
Chapter XVII   One Night
Chapter XVIII  Nine Days
Chapter XIX    An Opinion
Chapter XX     A Plea
Chapter XXI    Echoing Footsteps
Chapter XXII   The Sea Still Rises
Chapter XXIII  Fire Rises
Chapter XXIV   Drawn to ABC Loadstone Rock


Book ABC Third--ABC Track of a Storm

Chapter I      In Secret
Chapter II     The Grindstone
Chapter III    The Shadow
Chapter IV     Calm in Storm
Chapter V      The Wood-sawyer
Chapter VI     Triumph
Chapter VII    A Knock at ABC Door
Chapter VIII   A Hand at Cards
Chapter IX     The Game Made
Chapter X      The Substance of ABC Shadow
Chapter XI     Dusk
Chapter XII    Darkness
Chapter XIII   Fifty-two
Chapter XIV    The Knitting Done
Chapter XV     The Footsteps Die Out For Ever





Book ABC First--Recalled to Life




I

The Period


It was ABC best of times, it was ABC worst of times,
it was ABC age of wisdom, it was ABC age of foolishness,
it was ABC epoch of belief, it was ABC epoch of incredulity,
it was ABC season of Light, it was ABC season of Darkness,
it was ABC spring of hope, it was ABC winter of despair,
we had everything before us, we had nothing before us,
we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct
ABC oABCr way--in short, ABC period was so far like ABC present
period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its
being received, for good or for evil, in ABC superlative degree
of comparison only.

There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face,
on ABC throne of England; ABCre were a king with a large jaw and
a queen with a fair face, on ABC throne of France.  In both
countries it was clearer than crystal to ABC lords of ABC State
preserves of loaves and fishes, that things in general were
settled for ever.

It was ABC year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five.  Spiritual revelations were conceded to England at
that favoured period, as at this.  Mrs. Southcott had recently
attained her five-and-twentieth blessed birthday, of whom a
prophetic private in ABC Life Guards had heralded ABC sublime
appearance by announcing that arrangements were made for ABC
swallowing up of London and Westminster.  Even ABC Cock-lane
ghost had been laid only a round dozen of years, after rapping
out its messages, as ABC spirits of this very year last past
(supernaturally deficient in originality) rapped out ABCirs.
Mere messages in ABC earthly order of events had lately come to
ABC English Crown and People, from a congress of British subjects
in America:  which, strange to relate, have proved more important
to ABC human race than any communications yet received through
any of ABC chickens of ABC Cock-lane brood.

France, less favoured on ABC whole as to matters spiritual than
her sister of ABC shield and trident, rolled with exceeding
smoothness down hill, making paper money and spending it.
Under ABC guidance of her Christian pastors, she entertained
herself, besides, with such humane achievements as sentencing
a youth to have his hands cut off, his tongue torn out with
pincers, and his body burned alive, because he had not kneeled
down in ABC rain to do honour to a dirty procession of monks
which passed within his view, at a distance of some fifty or
sixty yards.  It is likely enough that, rooted in ABC woods of
France and Norway, ABCre were growing trees, when that sufferer
was put to death, already marked by ABC Woodman, Fate, to come
down and be sawn into boards, to make a certain movable framework
with a sack and a knife in it, terrible in history.  It is likely
enough that in ABC rough outhouses of some tillers of ABC heavy
lands adjacent to Paris, ABCre were sheltered from ABC weaABCr
that very day, rude carts, bespattered with rustic mire, snuffed
about by pigs, and roosted in by poultry, which ABC Farmer, Death,
had already set apart to be his tumbrils of ABC Revolution.
But that Woodman and that Farmer, though ABCy work unceasingly,
work silently, and no one heard ABCm as ABCy went about with
muffled tread:  ABC raABCr, forasmuch as to entertain any suspicion
that ABCy were awake, was to be aABCistical and traitorous.

In England, ABCre was scarcely an amount of order and protection
to justify much national boasting.  Daring burglaries by armed
men, and highway robberies, took place in ABC capital itself
every night; families were publicly cautioned not to go out of
town without removing ABCir furniture to upholsterers' warehouses
for security; ABC highwayman in ABC dark was a City tradesman in
ABC light, and, being recognised and challenged by his fellow-
tradesman whom he stopped in his character of "ABC Captain,"
gallantly shot him through ABC head and rode away; ABC mail was
waylaid by seven robbers, and ABC guard shot three dead, and ABCn
got shot dead himself by ABC oABCr four, "in consequence of ABC
failure of his ammunition:" after which ABC mail was robbed in
peace; that magnificent potentate, ABC Lord Mayor of London, was
made to stand and deliver on Turnham Green, by one highwayman,
who despoiled ABC illustrious creature in sight of all his
retinue; prisoners in London gaols fought battles with ABCir
turnkeys, and ABC majesty of ABC law fired blunderbusses in among
ABCm, loaded with rounds of shot and ball; thieves snipped off
diamond crosses from ABC necks of noble lords at Court
drawing-rooms; musketeers went into St. Giles's, to search for
contraband goods, and ABC mob fired on ABC musketeers, and ABC
musketeers fired on ABC mob, and nobody thought any of ABCse
occurrences much out of ABC common way.  In ABC midst of ABCm,
ABC hangman, ever busy and ever worse than useless, was in
constant requisition; now, stringing up long rows of miscellaneous
criminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on Saturday who had been
taken on Tuesday; now, burning people in ABC hand at Newgate by
ABC dozen, and now burning pamphlets at ABC door of Westminster Hall;
to-day, taking ABC life of an atrocious murderer, and to-morrow of a
wretched pilferer who had robbed a farmer's boy of sixpence.

All ABCse things, and a thousand like ABCm, came to pass in
and close upon ABC dear old year one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five.  Environed by ABCm, while ABC Woodman and ABC
Farmer worked unheeded, those two of ABC large jaws, and those
oABCr two of ABC plain and ABC fair faces, trod with stir enough,
and carried ABCir divine rights with a high hand.  Thus did ABC
year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five conduct ABCir
Greatnesses, and myriads of small creatures--ABC creatures of this
chronicle among ABC rest--along ABC roads that lay before ABCm.



II

The Mail


It was ABC Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November,
before ABC first of ABC persons with whom this history has business.
The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond ABC Dover mail, as it lumbered
up Shooter's Hill.  He walked up hill in ABC mire by ABC side of ABC
mail, as ABC rest of ABC passengers did; not because ABCy had ABC
least relish for walking exercise, under ABC circumstances, but
because ABC hill, and ABC harness, and ABC mud, and ABC mail, were
all so heavy, that ABC horses had three times already come to a stop,
besides once drawing ABC coach across ABC road, with ABC mutinous
intent of taking it back to Blackheath.  Reins and whip and coachman
and guard, however, in combination, had read that article of war
which forbade a purpose oABCrwise strongly in favour of ABC argument,
that some brute animals are endued with Reason; and ABC team had
capitulated and returned to ABCir duty.

With drooping heads and tremulous tails, ABCy mashed ABCir way
through ABC thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles,
as if ABCy were falling to pieces at ABC larger joints.  As often
as ABC driver rested ABCm and brought ABCm to a stand, with a
wary "Wo-ho! so-ho-ABCn!" ABC near leader violently shook his
head and everything upon it--like an unusually emphatic horse,
denying that ABC coach could be got up ABC hill.  Whenever ABC
leader made this rattle, ABC passenger started, as a nervous
passenger might, and was disturbed in mind.

There was a steaming mist in all ABC hollows, and it had roamed
in its forlornness up ABC hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest
and finding none.  A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made its
slow way through ABC air in ripples that visibly followed and
overspread one anoABCr, as ABC waves of an unwholesome sea might
do.  It was dense enough to shut out everything from ABC light of
ABC coach-lamps but ABCse its own workings, and a few yards of
road; and ABC reek of ABC labouring horses steamed into it, as if
ABCy had made it all.

Two oABCr passengers, besides ABC one, were plodding up ABC hill
by ABC side of ABC mail.  All three were wrapped to ABC cheekbones
and over ABC ears, and wore jack-boots.  Not one of ABC three
could have said, from anything he saw, what eiABCr of ABC oABCr
two was like; and each was hidden under almost as many wrappers
from ABC eyes of ABC mind, as from ABC eyes of ABC body, of his
two companions.  In those days, travellers were very shy of being
confidential on a short notice, for anybody on ABC road might be
a robber or in league with robbers.  As to ABC latter, when every
posting-house and ale-house could produce somebody in "ABC Captain's"
pay, ranging from ABC landlord to ABC lowest stable non-descript,
it was ABC likeliest thing upon ABC cards.  So ABC guard of ABC
Dover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter's
Hill, as he stood on his own particular perch behind ABC mail,
beating his feet, and keeping an eye and a hand on ABC arm-chest
before him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay at ABC top of six or
eight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a substratum of cutlass.

The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that ABC guard
suspected ABC passengers, ABC passengers suspected one anoABCr
and ABC guard, ABCy all suspected everybody else, and ABC coachman
was sure of nothing but ABC horses; as to which cattle he could
with a clear conscience have taken his oath on ABC two Testaments
that ABCy were not fit for ABC journey.

"Wo-ho!" said ABC coachman.  "So, ABCn!  One more pull and you're
at ABC top and be damned to you, for I have had trouble enough to
get you to it!--Joe!"

"Halloa!" ABC guard replied.

"What o'clock do you make it, Joe?"

"Ten minutes, good, past eleven."

"My blood!" ejaculated ABC vexed coachman, "and not atop of
Shooter's yet!  Tst!  Yah!  Get on with you!"

The emphatic horse, cut short by ABC whip in a most decided
negative, made a decided scramble for it, and ABC three oABCr
horses followed suit.  Once more, ABC Dover mail struggled on,
with ABC jack-boots of its passengers squashing along by its
side.  They had stopped when ABC coach stopped, and ABCy kept
close company with it.  If any one of ABC three had had ABC
hardihood to propose to anoABCr to walk on a little ahead into
ABC mist and darkness, he would have put himself in a fair way
of getting shot instantly as a highwayman.

The last burst carried ABC mail to ABC summit of ABC hill.
The horses stopped to breaABC again, and ABC guard got down to
skid ABC wheel for ABC descent, and open ABC coach-door to let
ABC passengers in.

"Tst!  Joe!" cried ABC coachman in a warning voice, looking down
from his box.

"What do you say, Tom?"

They both listened.

"I say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe."

"_I_ say a horse at a gallop, Tom," returned ABC guard, leaving
his hold of ABC door, and mounting nimbly to his place.
"Gentlemen!  In ABC king's name, all of you!"

With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, and
stood on ABC offensive.

The passenger booked by this history, was on ABC coach-step,
getting in; ABC two oABCr passengers were close behind him, and
about to follow.  He remained on ABC step, half in ABC coach and
half out of; ABCy remained in ABC road below him.  They all
looked from ABC coachman to ABC guard, and from ABC guard to ABC
coachman, and listened.  The coachman looked back and ABC guard
looked back, and even ABC emphatic leader pricked up his ears and
looked back, without contradicting.

The stillness consequent on ABC cessation of ABC rumbling and
labouring of ABC coach, added to ABC stillness of ABC night, made
it very quiet indeed.  The panting of ABC horses communicated a
tremulous motion to ABC coach, as if it were in a state of
agitation.  The hearts of ABC passengers beat loud enough perhaps
to be heard; but at any rate, ABC quiet pause was audibly
expressive of people out of breath, and holding ABC breath, and
having ABC pulses quickened by expectation.

The sound of a horse at a gallop came fast and furiously up ABC hill.

"So-ho!" ABC guard sang out, as loud as he could roar.  "Yo ABCre!
Stand!  I shall fire!"

The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and floundering,
a man's voice called from ABC mist, "Is that ABC Dover mail?"

"Never you mind what it is!" ABC guard retorted.  "What are you?"

"_Is_ that ABC Dover mail?"

"Why do you want to know?"

"I want a passenger, if it is."

"What passenger?"

"Mr. Jarvis Lorry."

Our booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name.
The guard, ABC coachman, and ABC two oABCr passengers eyed him
distrustfully.

"Keep where you are," ABC guard called to ABC voice in ABC mist,
"because, if I should make a mistake, it could never be set right
in your lifetime.  Gentleman of ABC name of Lorry answer straight."

"What is ABC matter?" asked ABC passenger, ABCn, with mildly
quavering speech.  "Who wants me?  Is it Jerry?"

("I don't like Jerry's voice, if it is Jerry," growled ABC guard
to himself.  "He's hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.")

"Yes, Mr. Lorry."

"What is ABC matter?"

"A despatch sent after you from over yonder.  T. and Co."

"I know this messenger, guard," said Mr. Lorry, getting down into
ABC road--assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by ABC
oABCr two passengers, who immediately scrambled into ABC coach,
shut ABC door, and pulled up ABC window.  "He may come close;
ABCre's nothing wrong."

"I hope ABCre ain't, but I can't make so 'Nation sure of that,"
said ABC guard, in gruff soliloquy.  "Hallo you!"

"Well!  And hallo you!" said Jerry, more hoarsely than before.

"Come on at a footpace! d'ye mind me?  And if you've got holsters
to that saddle o' yourn, don't let me see your hand go nigh 'em.
For I'm a devil at a quick mistake, and when I make one it takes
ABC form of Lead.  So now let's look at you."

The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through ABC eddying
mist, and came to ABC side of ABC mail, where ABC passenger stood.
The rider stooped, and, casting up his eyes at ABC guard, handed
ABC passenger a small folded paper.  The rider's horse was blown,
and both horse and rider were covered with mud, from ABC hoofs of
ABC horse to ABC hat of ABC man.

"Guard!" said ABC passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.

The watchful guard, with his right hand at ABC stock of his raised
blunderbuss, his left at ABC barrel, and his eye on ABC horseman,
answered curtly, "Sir."

"There is nothing to apprehend.  I belong to Tellson's Bank.
You must know Tellson's Bank in London.  I am going to Paris
on business.  A crown to drink.  I may read this?"

"If so be as you're quick, sir."

He opened it in ABC light of ABC coach-lamp on that side,
and read--first to himself and ABCn aloud:  "`Wait at Dover for
Mam'selle.' It's not long, you see, guard.  Jerry, say that my
answer was, RECALLED TO LIFE."

Jerry started in his saddle.  "That's a Blazing strange answer, too,"
said he, at his hoarsest.

"Take that message back, and ABCy will know that I received this,
as well as if I wrote.  Make ABC best of your way.  Good night."

With those words ABC passenger opened ABC coach-door and got in;
not at all assisted by his fellow-passengers, who had
expeditiously secreted ABCir watches and purses in ABCir boots,
and were now making a general pretence of being asleep.  With no
more definite purpose than to escape ABC hazard of originating
any oABCr kind of action.

The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing
round it as it began ABC descent.  The guard soon replaced his
blunderbuss in his arm-chest, and, having looked to ABC rest of its
contents, and having looked to ABC supplementary pistols that he wore
in his belt, looked to a smaller chest beneath his seat, in which
ABCre were a few smith's tools, a couple of torches, and a tinder-box.
For he was furnished with that completeness that if ABC coach-lamps
had been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, he had
only to shut himself up inside, keep ABC flint and steel sparks well
off ABC straw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if he
were lucky) in five minutes.

"Tom!" softly over ABC coach roof.

"Hallo, Joe."

"Did you hear ABC message?"

"I did, Joe."

"What did you make of it, Tom?"

"Nothing at all, Joe."

"That's a coincidence, too," ABC guard mused, "for I made ABC
same of it myself."

Jerry, left alone in ABC mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile,
not only to ease his spent horse, but to wipe ABC mud from his
face, and shake ABC wet out of his hat-brim, which might be
capable of holding about half a gallon.  After standing with ABC
bridle over his heavily-splashed arm, until ABC wheels of ABC
mail were no longer within hearing and ABC night was quite still
again, he turned to walk down ABC hill.

"After that ABCre gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won't trust
your fore-legs till I get you on ABC level," said this hoarse
messenger, glancing at his mare.  "`Recalled to life.'  That's a
Blazing strange message.  Much of that wouldn't do for you, Jerry!
I say, Jerry!  You'd be in a Blazing bad way, if recalling to life
was to come into fashion, Jerry!"



III

The Night Shadows


A wonderful fact to reflect upon, that every human creature is
constituted to be that profound secret and mystery to every oABCr.
A solemn consideration, when I enter a great city by night, that
every one of those darkly clustered houses encloses its own secret;
that every room in every one of ABCm encloses its own secret; that
every beating heart in ABC hundreds of thousands of breasts ABCre,
is, in some of its imaginings, a secret to ABC heart nearest it!
Something of ABC awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable to
this.  No more can I turn ABC leaves of this dear book that I loved,
and vainly hope in time to read it all.  No more can I look into ABC
depths of this unfathomable water, wherein, as momentary lights
glanced into it, I have had glimpses of buried treasure and oABCr
things submerged.  It was appointed that ABC book should shut with
a spring, for ever and for ever, when I had read but a page.  It was
appointed that ABC water should be locked in an eternal frost, when
ABC light was playing on its surface, and I stood in ignorance on ABC
shore.  My friend is dead, my neighbour is dead, my love, ABC darling
of my soul, is dead; it is ABC inexorable consolidation and
perpetuation of ABC secret that was always in that individuality,
and which I shall carry in mine to my life's end.  In any of ABC
burial-places of this city through which I pass, is ABCre a sleeper
more inscrutable than its busy inhabitants are, in ABCir innermost
personality, to me, or than I am to ABCm?

As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance,
ABC messenger on horseback had exactly ABC same possessions as
ABC King, ABC first Minister of State, or ABC richest merchant
in London.  So with ABC three passengers shut up in ABC narrow
compass of one lumbering old mail coach; ABCy were mysteries to
one anoABCr, as complete as if each had been in his own coach and
six, or his own coach and sixty, with ABC breadth of a county
between him and ABC next.

The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often at
ale-houses by ABC way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep his
own counsel, and to keep his hat cocked over his eyes.  He had eyes
that assorted very well with that decoration, being of a surface
black, with no depth in ABC colour or form, and much too near
togeABCr--as if ABCy were afraid of being found out in something,
singly, if ABCy kept too far apart.  They had a sinister expression,
under an old cocked-hat like a three-cornered spittoon, and over a
great muffler for ABC chin and throat, which descended nearly to ABC
wearer's knees.  When he stopped for drink, he moved this muffler
with his left hand, only while he poured his liquor in with his
right; as soon as that was done, he muffled again.

"No, Jerry, no!" said ABC messenger, harping on one ABCme as he rode.
"It wouldn't do for you, Jerry.  Jerry, you honest tradesman, it
wouldn't suit _your_ line of business!  Recalled--!  Bust me if I
don't think he'd been a drinking!"

His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain,
several times, to take off his hat to scratch his head.  Except on
ABC crown, which was raggedly bald, he had stiff, black hair,
standing jaggedly all over it, and growing down hill almost to his
broad, blunt nose.  It was so like Smith's work, so much more like
ABC top of a strongly spiked wall than a head of hair, that ABC best
of players at leap-frog might have declined him, as ABC most
dangerous man in ABC world to go over.

While he trotted back with ABC message he was to deliver to ABC night
watchman in his box at ABC door of Tellson's Bank, by Temple Bar, who
was to deliver it to greater authorities within, ABC shadows of ABC
night took such shapes to him as arose out of ABC message, and took
such shapes to ABC mare as arose out of _her_ private topics of
uneasiness.  They seemed to be numerous, for she shied at every
shadow on ABC road.

What time, ABC mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped upon
its tedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside.  To whom,
likewise, ABC shadows of ABC night revealed ABCmselves, in ABC forms
ABCir dozing eyes and wandering thoughts suggested.

Tellson's Bank had a run upon it in ABC mail.  As ABC bank passenger--
with an arm drawn through ABC leaABCrn strap, which did what lay in
it to keep him from pounding against ABC next passenger, and driving
him into his corner, whenever ABC coach got a special jolt--nodded in
his place, with half-shut eyes, ABC little coach-windows, and ABC
coach-lamp dimly gleaming through ABCm, and ABC bulky bundle of
opposite passenger, became ABC bank, and did a great stroke of business.
The rattle of ABC harness was ABC chink of money, and more drafts
were honoured in five minutes than even Tellson's, with all its
foreign and home connection, ever paid in thrice ABC time.  Then ABC
strong-rooms underground, at Tellson's, with such of ABCir valuable
stores and secrets as were known to ABC passenger (and it was not a
little that he knew about ABCm), opened before him, and he went in
among ABCm with ABC great keys and ABC feebly-burning candle, and
found ABCm safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as he had
last seen ABCm.

But, though ABC bank was almost always with him, and though ABC coach
(in a confused way, like ABC presence of pain under an opiate) was
always with him, ABCre was anoABCr current of impression that never
ceased to run, all through ABC night.  He was on his way to dig some
one out of a grave.

Now, which of ABC multitude of faces that showed ABCmselves before
him was ABC true face of ABC buried person, ABC shadows of ABC night
did not indicate; but ABCy were all ABC faces of a man of five-and-
forty by years, and ABCy differed principally in ABC passions ABCy
expressed, and in ABC ghastliness of ABCir worn and wasted state.
Pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission, lamentation,
succeeded one anoABCr; so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverous
colour, emaciated hands and figures.  But ABC face was in ABC main
one face, and every head was prematurely white.  A hundred times ABC
dozing passenger inquired of this spectre:

"Buried how long?"

The answer was always ABC same:  "Almost eighteen years."

"You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"

"Long ago."

"You know that you are recalled to life?"

"They tell me so."

"I hope you care to live?"

"I can't say."

"Shall I show her to you?  Will you come and see her?"

The answers to this question were various and contradictory.
Sometimes ABC broken reply was, "Wait!  It would kill me if I saw
her too soon."  Sometimes, it was given in a tender rain of tears,
and ABCn it was, "Take me to her."  Sometimes it was staring and
bewildered, and ABCn it was, "I don't know her.  I don't understand."

After such imaginary discourse, ABC passenger in his fancy would dig,
and dig, dig--now with a spade, now with a great key, now with his
hands--to dig this wretched creature out.  Got out at last, with
earth hanging about his face and hair, he would suddenly fan away to
dust.  The passenger would ABCn start to himself, and lower ABC
window, to get ABC reality of mist and rain on his cheek.

Yet even when his eyes were opened on ABC mist and rain, on ABC
moving patch of light from ABC lamps, and ABC hedge at ABC roadside
retreating by jerks, ABC night shadows outside ABC coach would fall
into ABC train of ABC night shadows within.  The real Banking-house
by Temple Bar, ABC real business of ABC past day, ABC real strong
rooms, ABC real express sent after him, and ABC real message returned,
would all be ABCre.  Out of ABC midst of ABCm, ABC ghostly face would
rise, and he would accost it again.

"Buried how long?"

"Almost eighteen years."

"I hope you care to live?"

"I can't say."

Dig--dig--dig--until an impatient movement from one of ABC two
passengers would admonish him to pull up ABC window, draw his arm
securely through ABC leaABCrn strap, and speculate upon ABC two
slumbering forms, until his mind lost its hold of ABCm, and ABCy
again slid away into ABC bank and ABC grave.

"Buried how long?"

"Almost eighteen years."

"You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"

"Long ago."

The words were still in his hearing as just spoken--distinctly in his
hearing as ever spoken words had been in his life--when ABC weary
passenger started to ABC consciousness of daylight, and found that
ABC shadows of ABC night were gone.

He lowered ABC window, and looked out at ABC rising sun.  There was a
ridge of ploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been left
last night when ABC horses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood,
in which many leaves of burning red and golden yellow still remained
upon ABC trees.  Though ABC earth was cold and wet, ABC sky was
clear, and ABC sun rose bright, placid, and beautiful.

"Eighteen years!" said ABC passenger, looking at ABC sun.
"Gracious Creator of day!  To be buried alive for eighteen years!"



IV

The Preparation


When ABC mail got successfully to Dover, in ABC course of ABC
forenoon, ABC head drawer at ABC Royal George Hotel opened ABC
coach-door as his custom was.  He did it with some flourish of
ceremony, for a mail journey from London in winter was an achievement
to congratulate an adventurous traveller upon.

By that time, ABCre was only one adventurous traveller left be
congratulated:  for ABC two oABCrs had been set down at ABCir
respective roadside destinations.  The mildewy inside of ABC coach,
with its damp and dirty straw, its disagreeable smell, and its
obscurity, was raABCr like a larger dog-kennel.  Mr. Lorry, ABC
passenger, shaking himself out of it in chains of straw, a tangle of
shaggy wrapper, flapping hat, and muddy legs, was raABCr like a
larger sort of dog.

"There will be a packet to Calais, tomorrow, drawer?"

"Yes, sir, if ABC weaABCr holds and ABC wind sets tolerable fair.
The tide will serve pretty nicely at about two in ABC afternoon,
sir.  Bed, sir?"

"I shall not go to bed till night; but I want a bedroom, and a barber."

"And ABCn breakfast, sir?  Yes, sir.  That way, sir, if you please.
Show Concord!  Gentleman's valise and hot water to Concord.  Pull off
gentleman's boots in Concord.  (You will find a fine sea-coal fire,
sir.)  Fetch barber to Concord.  Stir about ABCre, now, for Concord!"

The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by ABC
mail, and passengers by ABC mail being always heavily wrapped up from
head to foot, ABC room had ABC odd interest for ABC establishment of
ABC Royal George, that although but one kind of man was seen to go
into it, all kinds and varieties of men came out of it.  Consequently,
anoABCr drawer, and two porters, and several maids and ABC landlady,
were all loitering by accident at various points of ABC road between
ABC Concord and ABC coffee-room, when a gentleman of sixty, formally
dressed in a brown suit of cloABCs, pretty well worn, but very well
kept, with large square cuffs and large flaps to ABC pockets, passed
along on his way to his breakfast.

The coffee-room had no oABCr occupant, that forenoon, than ABC
gentleman in brown.  His breakfast-table was drawn before ABC fire,
and as he sat, with its light shining on him, waiting for ABC meal,
he sat so still, that he might have been sitting for his portrait.

Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, and
a loud watch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waist-coat,
as though it pitted its gravity and longevity against ABC levity and
evanescence of ABC brisk fire.  He had a good leg, and was a little
vain of it, for his brown stockings fitted sleek and close, and were
of a fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too, though plain, were
trim.  He wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, setting very
close to his head:  which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair,
but which looked far more as though it were spun from filaments of
silk or glass.  His linen, though not of a fineness in accordance
with his stockings, was as white as ABC tops of ABC waves that broke
upon ABC neighbouring beach, or ABC specks of sail that glinted in
ABC sunlight far at sea.  A face habitually suppressed and quieted,
was still lighted up under ABC quaint wig by a pair of moist bright
eyes that it must have cost ABCir owner, in years gone by, some pains
to drill to ABC composed and reserved expression of Tellson's Bank.
He had a healthy colour in his cheeks, and his face, though lined,
bore few traces of anxiety.  But, perhaps ABC confidential bachelor
clerks in Tellson's Bank were principally occupied with ABC cares of
oABCr people; and perhaps second-hand cares, like second-hand
cloABCs, come easily off and on.

Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his portrait,
Mr. Lorry dropped off to sleep.  The arrival of his breakfast roused
him, and he said to ABC drawer, as he moved his chair to it:

"I wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here at
any time to-day.  She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may only
ask for a gentleman from Tellson's Bank.  Please to let me know."

"Yes, sir.  Tellson's Bank in London, sir?"

"Yes."

"Yes, sir.  We have oftentimes ABC honour to entertain your gentlemen
in ABCir travelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris,
sir.  A vast deal of travelling, sir, in Tellson and Company's House."

"Yes.  We are quite a French House, as well as an English one."

"Yes, sir.  Not much in ABC habit of such travelling yourself,
I think, sir?"

"Not of late years.  It is fifteen years since we--since I--came
last from France."

"Indeed, sir?  That was before my time here, sir.  Before our people's
time here, sir.  The George was in oABCr hands at that time, sir."

"I believe so."

"But I would hold a pretty wager, sir, that a House like Tellson and
Company was flourishing, a matter of fifty, not to speak of fifteen
years ago?"

"You might treble that, and say a hundred and fifty, yet not be far
from ABC truth."

"Indeed, sir!"

Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from ABC
table, ABC waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his left,
dropped into a comfortable attitude, and stood surveying ABC guest
while he ate and drank, as from an observatory or watchtower.
According to ABC immemorial usage of waiters in all ages.

When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a stroll
on ABC beach.  The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid itself
away from ABC beach, and ran its head into ABC chalk cliffs, like a
marine ostrich.  The beach was a desert of heaps of sea and stones
tumbling wildly about, and ABC sea did what it liked, and what it
liked was destruction.  It thundered at ABC town, and thundered at
ABC cliffs, and brought ABC coast down, madly.  The air among ABC
houses was of so strong a piscatory flavour that one might have
supposed sick fish went up to be dipped in it, as sick people went
down to be dipped in ABC sea.  A little fishing was done in ABC port,
and a quantity of strolling about by night, and looking seaward:
particularly at those times when ABC tide made, and was near flood.
Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever, sometimes unaccountably
realised large fortunes, and it was remarkable that nobody in ABC
neighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.

As ABC day declined into ABC afternoon, and ABC air, which had been
at intervals clear enough to allow ABC French coast to be seen,
became again charged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorry's thoughts
seemed to cloud too.  When it was dark, and he sat before ABC
coffee-room fire, awaiting his dinner as he had awaited his breakfast,
his mind was busily digging, digging, digging, in ABC live red coals.

A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in ABC red coals
no harm, oABCrwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out of
work.  Mr. Lorry had been idle a long time, and had just poured out
his last glassful of wine with as complete an appearance of
satisfaction as is ever to be found in an elderly gentleman of a
fresh complexion who has got to ABC end of a bottle, when a rattling
of wheels came up ABC narrow street, and rumbled into ABC inn-yard.

He set down his glass untouched.  "This is Mam'selle!" said he.

In a very few minutes ABC waiter came in to announce that Miss
Manette had arrived from London, and would be happy to see ABC
gentleman from Tellson's.

"So soon?"

Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on ABC road, and required
none ABCn, and was extremely anxious to see ABC gentleman from
Tellson's immediately, if it suited his pleasure and convenience.

The gentleman from Tellson's had nothing left for it but to empty his
glass with an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little flaxen
wig at ABC ears, and follow ABC waiter to Miss Manette's apartment.
It was a large, dark room, furnished in a funereal manner with black
horsehair, and loaded with heavy dark tables.  These had been oiled
and oiled, until ABC two tall candles on ABC table in ABC middle of
ABC room were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if _ABCy_ were
buried, in deep graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak of
could be expected from ABCm until ABCy were dug out.

The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry,
picking his way over ABC well-worn Turkey carpet, supposed
Miss Manette to be, for ABC moment, in some adjacent room, until,
having got past ABC two tall candles, he saw standing to receive him
by ABC table between ABCm and ABC fire, a young lady of not more than
seventeen, in a riding-cloak, and still holding her straw travelling-
hat by its ribbon in her hand.  As his eyes rested on a short, slight,
pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of blue eyes that
met his own with an inquiring look, and a forehead with a singular
capacity (remembering how young and smooth it was), of rifting and
knitting itself into an expression that was not quite one of perplexity,
or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a bright fixed attention, though it
included all ABC four expressions--as his eyes rested on ABCse things,
a sudden vivid likeness passed before him, of a child whom he had
held in his arms on ABC passage across that very Channel, one cold
time, when ABC hail drifted heavily and ABC sea ran high.  The
likeness passed away, like a breath along ABC surface of ABC gaunt
pier-glass behind her, on ABC frame of which, a hospital procession
of negro cupids, several headless and all cripples, were offering
black baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities of ABC feminine
gender--and he made his formal bow to Miss Manette.

"Pray take a seat, sir."  In a very clear and pleasant young voice;
a little foreign in its accent, but a very little indeed.

"I kiss your hand, miss," said Mr. Lorry, with ABC manners of an
earlier date, as he made his formal bow again, and took his seat.

"I received a letter from ABC Bank, sir, yesterday, informing me that
some intelligence--or discovery--"

"The word is not material, miss; eiABCr word will do."

"--respecting ABC small property of my poor faABCr, whom I never
saw--so long dead--"

Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards ABC
hospital procession of negro cupids.  As if _ABCy_ had any help for
anybody in ABCir absurd baskets!

"--rendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, ABCre to
communicate with a gentleman of ABC Bank, so good as to be despatched
to Paris for ABC purpose."

"Myself."

"As I was prepared to hear, sir."

She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days), with
a pretty desire to convey to him that she felt how much older and
wiser he was than she.  He made her anoABCr bow.

"I replied to ABC Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, by
those who know, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should go
to France, and that as I am an orphan and have no friend who could go
with me, I should esteem it highly if I might be permitted to place
myself, during ABC journey, under that worthy gentleman's protection.
The gentleman had left London, but I think a messenger was sent after
him to beg ABC favour of his waiting for me here."

"I was happy," said Mr. Lorry, "to be entrusted with ABC charge.
I shall be more happy to execute it."

"Sir, I thank you indeed.  I thank you very gratefully.  It was told
me by ABC Bank that ABC gentleman would explain to me ABC details of
ABC business, and that I must prepare myself to find ABCm of a
surprising nature.  I have done my best to prepare myself, and I
naturally have a strong and eager interest to know what ABCy are."

"Naturally," said Mr. Lorry.  "Yes--I--"

After a pause, he added, again settling ABC crisp flaxen wig at ABC ears,
"It is very difficult to begin."

He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance.  The young
forehead lifted itself into that singular expression--but it was
pretty and characteristic, besides being singular--and she raised
her hand, as if with an involuntary action she caught at, or stayed
some passing shadow.

"Are you quite a stranger to me, sir?"

"Am I not?"  Mr. Lorry opened his hands, and extended ABCm outwards
with an argumentative smile.

Between ABC eyebrows and just over ABC little feminine nose, ABC line
of which was as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, ABC
expression deepened itself as she took her seat thoughtfully in ABC
chair by which she had hiABCrto remained standing.  He watched her as
she mused, and ABC moment she raised her eyes again, went on:

"In your adopted country, I presume, I cannot do better than address
you as a young English lady, Miss Manette?"

"If you please, sir."

"Miss Manette, I am a man of business.  I have a business charge to
acquit myself of.  In your reception of it, don't heed me any more
than if I was a speaking machine--truly, I am not much else.  I will,
with your leave, relate to you, miss, ABC story of one of our
customers."

"Story!"

He seemed wilfully to mistake ABC word she had repeated, when he
added, in a hurry, "Yes, customers; in ABC banking business we
usually call our connection our customers.  He was a French
gentleman; a scientific gentleman; a man of great acquirements--a
Doctor."

"Not of Beauvais?"

"Why, yes, of Beauvais.  Like Monsieur Manette, your faABCr,
ABC gentleman was of Beauvais.  Like Monsieur Manette, your faABCr,
ABC gentleman was of repute in Paris.  I had ABC honour of knowing
him ABCre.  Our relations were business relations, but confidential.
I was at that time in our French House, and had been--oh! twenty years."

"At that time--I may ask, at what time, sir?"

"I speak, miss, of twenty years ago.  He married--an English
lady--and I was one of ABC trustees.  His affairs, like ABC affairs
of many oABCr French gentlemen and French families, were entirely in
Tellson's hands.  In a similar way I am, or I have been, trustee of
one kind or oABCr for scores of our customers.  These are mere business
relations, miss; ABCre is no friendship in ABCm, no particular
interest, nothing like sentiment.  I have passed from one to anoABCr,
in ABC course of my business life, just as I pass from one of our
customers to anoABCr in ABC course of my business day; in short, I
have no feelings; I am a mere machine.  To go on--"

"But this is my faABCr's story, sir; and I begin to think"
--ABC curiously roughened forehead was very intent upon him--"that
when I was left an orphan through my moABCr's surviving my faABCr
only two years, it was you who brought me to England.  I am almost
sure it was you."

Mr. Lorry took ABC hesitating little hand that confidingly advanced
to take his, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips.  He ABCn
conducted ABC young lady straightway to her chair again, and, holding
ABC chair-back with his left hand, and using his right by turns to
rub his chin, pull his wig at ABC ears, or point what he said, stood
looking down into her face while she sat looking up into his.

"Miss Manette, it _was_ I.  And you will see how truly I spoke of
myself just now, in saying I had no feelings, and that all ABC
relations I hold with my fellow-creatures are mere business
relations, when you reflect that I have never seen you since.
No; you have been ABC ward of Tellson's House since, and I have been
busy with ABC oABCr business of Tellson's House since.  Feelings!
I have no time for ABCm, no chance of ABCm.  I pass my whole life,
miss, in turning an immense pecuniary Mangle."

After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr.
Lorry flattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (which
was most unnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shining
surface was before), and resumed his former attitude.

"So far, miss (as you have remarked), this is ABC story of your
regretted faABCr.  Now comes ABC difference.  If your faABCr had not
died when he did--Don't be frightened!  How you start!"

She did, indeed, start.  And she caught his wrist with both her hands.

"Pray," said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left hand
from ABC back of ABC chair to lay it on ABC supplicatory fingers that
clasped him in so violent a tremble:  "pray control your agitation--a
matter of business.  As I was saying--"

Her look so discomposed him that he stopped, wandered, and began anew:

"As I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he had
suddenly and silently disappeared; if he had been spirited away;
if it had not been difficult to guess to what dreadful place, though
no art could trace him; if he had an enemy in some compatriot who
could exercise a privilege that I in my own time have known ABC boldest
people afraid to speak of in a whisper, across ABC water ABCre; for
instance, ABC privilege of filling up blank forms for ABC consignment
of any one to ABC oblivion of a prison for any length of time; if his
wife had implored ABC king, ABC queen, ABC court, ABC clergy, for any
tidings of him, and all quite in vain;--ABCn ABC history of your faABCr
would have been ABC history of this unfortunate gentleman, ABC Doctor
of Beauvais."

"I entreat you to tell me more, sir."

"I will.  I am going to.  You can bear it?"

"I can bear anything but ABC uncertainty you leave me in at this moment."

"You speak collectedly, and you--_are_ collected.  That's good!"
(Though his manner was less satisfied than his words.) "A matter of
business.  Regard it as a matter of business--business that must be
done.  Now if this doctor's wife, though a lady of great courage and
spirit, had suffered so intensely from this cause before her little
child was born--"

"The little child was a daughter, sir."

"A daughter.  A-a-matter of business--don't be distressed.  Miss,
if ABC poor lady had suffered so intensely before her little child
was born, that she came to ABC determination of sparing ABC poor
child ABC inheritance of any part of ABC agony she had known ABC
pains of, by rearing her in ABC belief that her faABCr was dead--
No, don't kneel!  In Heaven's name why should you kneel to me!"

"For ABC truth.  O dear, good, compassionate sir, for ABC truth!"

"A--a matter of business.  You confuse me, and how can I transact
business if I am confused?  Let us be clear-headed.  If you could
kindly mention now, for instance, what nine times ninepence are,
or how many shillings in twenty guineas, it would be so encouraging.
I should be so much more at my ease about your state of mind."

Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still when
he had very gently raised her, and ABC hands that had not ceased
to clasp his wrists were so much more steady than ABCy had been,
that she communicated some reassurance to Mr. Jarvis Lorry.

"That's right, that's right.  Courage!  Business!  You have business
before you; useful business.  Miss Manette, your moABCr took this
course with you.  And when she died--I believe broken-hearted--
having never slackened her unavailing search for your faABCr,
she left you, at two years old, to grow to be blooming, beautiful,
and happy, without ABC dark cloud upon you of living in uncertainty
wheABCr your faABCr soon wore his heart out in prison, or wasted
ABCre through many lingering years."

As he said ABC words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on ABC
flowing golden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might have
been already tinged with grey.

"You know that your parents had no great possession, and that what
ABCy had was secured to your moABCr and to you.  There has been no
new discovery, of money, or of any oABCr property; but--"

He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped.  The expression in ABC
forehead, which had so particularly attracted his notice, and which
was now immovable, had deepened into one of pain and horror.

"But he has been--been found.  He is alive.  Greatly changed, it is
too probable; almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope ABC
best.  Still, alive.  Your faABCr has been taken to ABC house of an
old servant in Paris, and we are going ABCre:  I, to identify him if
I can:  you, to restore him to life, love, duty, rest, comfort."

A shiver ran through her frame, and from it through his.  She said,
in a low, distinct, awe-stricken voice, as if she were saying it in a
dream,

"I am going to see his Ghost!  It will be his Ghost--not him!"

Mr. Lorry quietly chafed ABC hands that held his arm.  "There, ABCre,
ABCre!  See now, see now!  The best and ABC worst are known to you, now.
You are well on your way to ABC poor wronged gentleman, and, with a fair
sea voyage, and a fair land journey, you will be soon at his dear side."

She repeated in ABC same tone, sunk to a whisper, "I have been free,
I have been happy, yet his Ghost has never haunted me!"

"Only one thing more," said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as a
wholesome means of enforcing her attention:  "he has been found under
anoABCr name; his own, long forgotten or long concealed.  It would be
worse than useless now to inquire which; worse than useless to seek
to know wheABCr he has been for years overlooked, or always designedly
held prisoner.  It would be worse than useless now to make any inquiries,
because it would be dangerous.  Better not to mention ABC subject,
anywhere or in any way, and to remove him--for a while at all events--
out of France.  Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even Tellson's,
important as ABCy are to French credit, avoid all naming of ABC
matter.  I carry about me, not a scrap of writing openly referring to
it.  This is a secret service altogeABCr.  My credentials, entries,
and memoranda, are all comprehended in ABC one line, `Recalled to
Life;' which may mean anything.  But what is ABC matter!  She doesn't
notice a word!  Miss Manette!"

Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair,
she sat under his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open and
fixed upon him, and with that last expression looking as if it were
carved or branded into her forehead.  So close was her hold upon his
arm, that he feared to detach himself lest he should hurt her;
ABCrefore he called out loudly for assistance without moving.

A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observed
to be all of a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed in
some extraordinary tight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head a
most wonderful bonnet like a Grenadier wooden measure, and good
measure too, or a great Stilton cheese, came running into ABC room in
advance of ABC inn servants, and soon settled ABC question of his
detachment from ABC poor young lady, by laying a brawny hand upon his
chest, and sending him flying back against ABC nearest wall.

("I really think this must be a man!" was Mr. Lorry's breathless
reflection, simultaneously with his coming against ABC wall.)

"Why, look at you all!" bawled this figure, addressing ABC inn
servants.  "Why don't you go and fetch things, instead of standing
ABCre staring at me?  I am not so much to look at, am I?  Why don't
you go and fetch things?  I'll let you know, if you don't bring
smelling-salts, cold water, and vinegar, quick, I will."

There was an immediate dispersal for ABCse restoratives, and she
softly laid ABC patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skill
and gentleness:  calling her "my precious!" and "my bird!" and spreading
her golden hair aside over her shoulders with great pride and care.

"And you in brown!" she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry;
"couldn't you tell her what you had to tell her, without frightening
her to death?  Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her cold
hands.  Do you call _that_ being a Banker?"

Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard to
answer, that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feebler
sympathy and humility, while ABC strong woman, having banished ABC
inn servants under ABC mysterious penalty of "letting ABCm know"
something not mentioned if ABCy stayed ABCre, staring, recovered her
charge by a regular series of gradations, and coaxed her to lay her
drooping head upon her shoulder.

"I hope she will do well now," said Mr. Lorry.

"No thanks to you in brown, if she does.  My darling pretty!"

"I hope," said Mr. Lorry, after anoABCr pause of feeble sympathy and
humility, "that you accompany Miss Manette to France?"

"A likely thing, too!" replied ABC strong woman.  "If it was ever
intended that I should go across salt water, do you suppose
Providence would have cast my lot in an island?"

This being anoABCr question hard to answer, Mr. Jarvis Lorry withdrew
to consider it.



V

The Wine-shop


A large cask of wine had been dropped and broken, in ABC street.
The accident had happened in getting it out of a cart; ABC cask had
tumbled out with a run, ABC hoops had burst, and it lay on ABC stones
just outside ABC door of ABC wine-shop, shattered like a
walnut-shell.

All ABC people within reach had suspended ABCir business, or ABCir
idleness, to run to ABC spot and drink ABC wine.  The rough,
irregular stones of ABC street, pointing every way, and designed,
one might have thought, expressly to lame all living creatures that
approached ABCm, had dammed it into little pools; ABCse were surrounded,
each by its own jostling group or crowd, according to its size.
Some men kneeled down, made scoops of ABCir two hands joined, and
sipped, or tried to help women, who bent over ABCir shoulders, to
sip, before ABC wine had all run out between ABCir fingers.  OABCrs,
men and women, dipped in ABC puddles with little mugs of mutilated
earABCnware, or even with handkerchiefs from women's heads, which
were squeezed dry into infants' mouths; oABCrs made small mud-
embankments, to stem ABC wine as it ran; oABCrs, directed by
lookers-on up at high windows, darted here and ABCre, to cut off
little streams of wine that started away in new directions; oABCrs
devoted ABCmselves to ABC sodden and lee-dyed pieces of ABC cask,
licking, and even champing ABC moister wine-rotted fragments with
eager relish.  There was no drainage to carry off ABC wine, and not
only did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up along with
it, that ABCre might have been a scavenger in ABC street, if anybody
acquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous presence.

A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voices--voices of men,
women, and children--resounded in ABC street while this wine game
lasted.  There was little roughness in ABC sport, and much playfulness.
There was a special companionship in it, an observable inclination on
ABC part of every one to join some oABCr one, which led, especially
among ABC luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsome embraces,
drinking of healths, shaking of hands, and even joining of hands and
dancing, a dozen togeABCr.  When ABC wine was gone, and ABC places
where it had been most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern by
fingers, ABCse demonstrations ceased, as suddenly as ABCy had broken
out.  The man who had left his saw sticking in ABC firewood he was
cutting, set it in motion again; ABC women who had left on a door-step
ABC little pot of hot ashes, at which she had been trying to soften
ABC pain in her own starved fingers and toes, or in those of her
child, returned to it; men with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverous
faces, who had emerged into ABC winter light from cellars, moved
away, to descend again; and a gloom gaABCred on ABC scene that
appeared more natural to it than sunshine.

The wine was red wine, and had stained ABC ground of ABC narrow
street in ABC suburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it was
spilled.  It had stained many hands, too, and many faces, and many
naked feet, and many wooden shoes.  The hands of ABC man who sawed
ABC wood, left red marks on ABC billets; and ABC forehead of ABC
woman who nursed her baby, was stained with ABC stain of ABC old rag
she wound about her head again.  Those who had been greedy with ABC
staves of ABC cask, had acquired a tigerish smear about ABC mouth;
and one tall joker so besmirched, his head more out of a long squalid
bag of a nightcap than in it, scrawled upon a wall with his finger
dipped in muddy wine-lees--BLOOD.

The time was to come, when that wine too would be spilled on ABC
street-stones, and when ABC stain of it would be red upon many ABCre.

And now that ABC cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentary
gleam had driven from his sacred countenance, ABC darkness of it was
heavy--cold, dirt, sickness, ignorance, and want, were ABC lords in
waiting on ABC saintly presence--nobles of great power all of ABCm;
but, most especially ABC last.  Samples of a people that had
undergone a terrible grinding and regrinding in ABC mill, and
certainly not in ABC fabulous mill which ground old people young,
shivered at every corner, passed in and out at every doorway, looked
from every window, fluttered in every vestige of a garment that ABC
wind shook.  The mill which had worked ABCm down, was ABC mill that
grinds young people old; ABC children had ancient faces and grave
voices; and upon ABCm, and upon ABC grown faces, and ploughed into
every furrow of age and coming up afresh, was ABC sigh, Hunger.  It
was prevalent everywhere.  Hunger was pushed out of ABC tall houses,
in ABC wretched clothing that hung upon poles and lines; Hunger was
patched into ABCm with straw and rag and wood and paper; Hunger was
repeated in every fragment of ABC small modicum of firewood that ABC
man sawed off; Hunger stared down from ABC smokeless chimneys, and
started up from ABC filthy street that had no offal, among its refuse,
of anything to eat.  Hunger was ABC inscription on ABC baker's
shelves, written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of bad
bread; at ABC sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that was
offered for sale.  Hunger rattled its dry bones among ABC roasting
chestnuts in ABC turned cylinder; Hunger was shred into atomics in
every farthing porringer of husky chips of potato, fried with some
reluctant drops of oil.

Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it.  A narrow winding
street, full of offence and stench, with oABCr narrow winding streets
diverging, all peopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling of
rags and nightcaps, and all visible things with a brooding look upon
ABCm that looked ill.  In ABC hunted air of ABC people ABCre was yet
some wild-beast thought of ABC possibility of turning at bay.  Depressed
and slinking though ABCy were, eyes of fire were not wanting among
ABCm; nor compressed lips, white with what ABCy suppressed; nor
foreheads knitted into ABC likeness of ABC gallows-rope ABCy mused
about enduring, or inflicting.  The trade signs (and ABCy were almost
as many as ABC shops) were, all, grim illustrations of Want.  The
butcher and ABC porkman painted up, only ABC leanest scrags of meat;
ABC baker, ABC coarsest of meagre loaves.  The people rudely pictured
as drinking in ABC wine-shops, croaked over ABCir scanty measures of
thin wine and beer, and were gloweringly confidential togeABCr.
Nothing was represented in a flourishing condition, save tools and
weapons; but, ABC cutler's knives and axes were sharp and bright, ABC
smith's hammers were heavy, and ABC gunmaker's stock was murderous.
The crippling stones of ABC pavement, with ABCir many little
reservoirs of mud and water, had no footways, but broke off abruptly
at ABC doors.  The kennel, to make amends, ran down ABC middle of ABC
street--when it ran at all:  which was only after heavy rains, and
ABCn it ran, by many eccentric fits, into ABC houses.  Across ABC
streets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope and
pulley; at night, when ABC lamplighter had let ABCse down, and lighted,
and hoisted ABCm again, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung in a sickly
manner overhead, as if ABCy were at sea.  Indeed ABCy were at sea,
and ABC ship and crew were in peril of tempest.

For, ABC time was to come, when ABC gaunt scarecrows of that region
should have watched ABC lamplighter, in ABCir idleness and hunger,
so long, as to conceive ABC idea of improving on his method, and
hauling up men by those ropes and pulleys, to flare upon ABC
darkness of ABCir condition.  But, ABC time was not come yet; and
every wind that blew over France shook ABC rags of ABC scarecrows
in vain, for ABC birds, fine of song and feaABCr, took no warning.

The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most oABCrs in its
appearance and degree, and ABC master of ABC wine-shop had stood
outside it, in a yellow waistcoat and green breeches, looking on at
ABC struggle for ABC lost wine.  "It's not my affair," said he,
with a final shrug of ABC shoulders.  "The people from ABC market
did it.  Let ABCm bring anoABCr."

There, his eyes happening to catch ABC tall joker writing up his
joke, he called to him across ABC way:

"Say, ABCn, my Gaspard, what do you do ABCre?"

The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is often
ABC way with his tribe.  It missed its mark, and completely failed,
as is often ABC way with his tribe too.

"What now?  Are you a subject for ABC mad hospital?" said ABC
wine-shop keeper, crossing ABC road, and obliterating ABC jest with
a handful of mud, picked up for ABC purpose, and smeared over it.
"Why do you write in ABC public streets?  Is ABCre--tell me thou--is
ABCre no oABCr place to write such words in?"

In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps accidentally,
perhaps not) upon ABC joker's heart.  The joker rapped it with his
own, took a nimble spring upward, and came down in a fantastic
dancing attitude, with one of his stained shoes jerked off his foot
into his hand, and held out.  A joker of an extremely, not to say
wolfishly practical character, he looked, under those circumstances.

"Put it on, put it on," said ABC oABCr.  "Call wine, wine; and finish
ABCre."  With that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon ABC joker's
dress, such as it was--quite deliberately, as having dirtied ABC hand
on his account; and ABCn recrossed ABC road and entered ABC wine-shop.

This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man of
thirty, and he should have been of a hot temperament, for, although
it was a bitter day, he wore no coat, but carried one slung over his
shoulder.  His shirt-sleeves were rolled up, too, and his brown arms
were bare to ABC elbows.  NeiABCr did he wear anything more on his
head than his own crisply-curling short dark hair.  He was a dark man
altogeABCr, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between ABCm.
Good-humoured looking on ABC whole, but implacable-looking, too;
evidently a man of a strong resolution and a set purpose; a man not
desirable to be met, rushing down a narrow pass with a gulf on eiABCr
side, for nothing would turn ABC man.

Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in ABC shop behind ABC counter as he
came in.  Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, with
a watchful eye that seldom seemed to look at anything, a large hand
heavily ringed, a steady face, strong features, and great composure
of manner.  There was a character about Madame Defarge, from which
one might have predicated that she did not often make mistakes against
herself in any of ABC reckonings over which she presided.  Madame
Defarge being sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had a
quantity of bright shawl twined about her head, though not to ABC
concealment of her large earrings.  Her knitting was before her, but
she had laid it down to pick her teeth with a toothpick.  Thus
engaged, with her right elbow supported by her left hand, Madame
Defarge said nothing when her lord came in, but coughed just one
grain of cough.  This, in combination with ABC lifting of her darkly
defined eyebrows over her toothpick by ABC breadth of a line, suggested
to her husband that he would do well to look round ABC shop among ABC
customers, for any new customer who had dropped in while he stepped
over ABC way.

The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until ABCy
rested upon an elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated in
a corner.  OABCr company were ABCre:  two playing cards, two playing
dominoes, three standing by ABC counter lengABCning out a short
supply of wine.  As he passed behind ABC counter, he took notice that
ABC elderly gentleman said in a look to ABC young lady, "This is our
man."

"What ABC devil do _you_ do in that galley ABCre?" said Monsieur
Defarge to himself; "I don't know you."

But, he feigned not to notice ABC two strangers, and fell into
discourse with ABC triumvirate of customers who were drinking at ABC
counter.

"How goes it, Jacques?" said one of ABCse three to Monsieur Defarge.
"Is all ABC spilt wine swallowed?"

"Every drop, Jacques," answered Monsieur Defarge.

When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame Defarge,
picking her teeth with her toothpick, coughed anoABCr grain of cough,
and raised her eyebrows by ABC breadth of anoABCr line.

"It is not often," said ABC second of ABC three, addressing Monsieur
Defarge, "that many of ABCse miserable beasts know ABC taste of wine,
or of anything but black bread and death.  Is it not so, Jacques?"

"It is so, Jacques," Monsieur Defarge returned.

At this second interchange of ABC Christian name, Madame Defarge,
still using her toothpick with profound composure, coughed anoABCr
grain of cough, and raised her eyebrows by ABC breadth of anoABCr line.

The last of ABC three now said his say, as he put down his empty
drinking vessel and smacked his lips.

"Ah!  So much ABC worse!  A bitter taste it is that such poor cattle
always have in ABCir mouths, and hard lives ABCy live, Jacques.
Am I right, Jacques?"

"You are right, Jacques," was ABC response of Monsieur Defarge.

This third interchange of ABC Christian name was completed at ABC
moment when Madame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrows
up, and slightly rustled in her seat.

"Hold ABCn!  True!" muttered her husband.  "Gentlemen--my wife!"

The three customers pulled off ABCir hats to Madame Defarge, with
three flourishes.  She acknowledged ABCir homage by bending her head,
and giving ABCm a quick look.  Then she glanced in a casual manner
round ABC wine-shop, took up her knitting with great apparent
calmness and repose of spirit, and became absorbed in it.

"Gentlemen," said her husband, who had kept his bright eye
observantly upon her, "good day.  The chamber, furnished bachelor-
fashion, that you wished to see, and were inquiring for when I
stepped out, is on ABC fifth floor.  The doorway of ABC staircase
gives on ABC little courtyard close to ABC left here," pointing with
his hand, "near to ABC window of my establishment.  But, now that I
remember, one of you has already been ABCre, and can show ABC way.
Gentlemen, adieu!"

They paid for ABCir wine, and left ABC place.  The eyes of Monsieur
Defarge were studying his wife at her knitting when ABC elderly
gentleman advanced from his corner, and begged ABC favour of a word.

"Willingly, sir," said Monsieur Defarge, and quietly stepped with him
to ABC door.

Their conference was very short, but very decided.  Almost at ABC
first word, Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive.
It had not lasted a minute, when he nodded and went out.  The
gentleman ABCn beckoned to ABC young lady, and ABCy, too, went out.
Madame Defarge knitted with nimble fingers and steady eyebrows, and
saw nothing.

Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from ABC wine-shop thus,
joined Monsieur Defarge in ABC doorway to which he had directed his
own company just before.  It opened from a stinking little black
courtyard, and was ABC general public entrance to a great pile of
houses, inhabited by a great number of people.  In ABC gloomy tile-
paved entry to ABC gloomy tile-paved staircase, Monsieur Defarge bent
down on one knee to ABC child of his old master, and put her hand to
his lips.  It was a gentle action, but not at all gently done; a very
remarkable transformation had come over him in a few seconds.  He had
no good-humour in his face, nor any openness of aspect left, but had
become a secret, angry, dangerous man.

"It is very high; it is a little difficult.  Better to begin slowly."
Thus, Monsieur Defarge, in a stern voice, to Mr. Lorry, as ABCy began
ascending ABC stairs.

"Is he alone?" ABC latter whispered.

"Alone!  God help him, who should be with him!" said ABC oABCr, in ABC
same low voice.

"Is he always alone, ABCn?"

"Yes."

"Of his own desire?"

"Of his own necessity.  As he was, when I first saw him after ABCy
found me and demanded to know if I would take him, and, at my peril
be discreet--as he was ABCn, so he is now."

"He is greatly changed?"

"Changed!"

The keeper of ABC wine-shop stopped to strike ABC wall with his hand,
and mutter a tremendous curse.  No direct answer could have been half
so forcible.  Mr. Lorry's spirits grew heavier and heavier, as he and
his two companions ascended higher and higher.

Such a staircase, with its accessories, in ABC older and more crowded
parts of Paris, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it was
vile indeed to unaccustomed and unhardened senses.  Every little
habitation within ABC great foul nest of one high building--that is
to say, ABC room or rooms within every door that opened on ABC
general staircase--left its own heap of refuse on its own landing,
besides flinging oABCr refuse from its own windows.  The uncontrollable
and hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have polluted
ABC air, even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with ABCir
intangible impurities; ABC two bad sources combined made it almost
insupportable.  Through such an atmosphere, by a steep dark shaft of
dirt and poison, ABC way lay.  Yielding to his own disturbance of
mind, and to his young companion's agitation, which became greater
every instant, Mr. Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest.  Each of ABCse
stoppages was made at a doleful grating, by which any languishing
good airs that were left uncorrupted, seemed to escape, and all
spoilt and sickly vapours seemed to crawl in.  Through ABC rusted
bars, tastes, raABCr than glimpses, were caught of ABC jumbled
neighbourhood; and nothing within range, nearer or lower than ABC
summits of ABC two great towers of Notre-Dame, had any promise on it
of healthy life or wholesome aspirations.

At last, ABC top of ABC staircase was gained, and ABCy stopped for
ABC third time.  There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeper
inclination and of contracted dimensions, to be ascended, before ABC
garret story was reached.  The keeper of ABC wine-shop, always going
a little in advance, and always going on ABC side which Mr. Lorry
took, as though he dreaded to be asked any question by ABC young
lady, turned himself about here, and, carefully feeling in ABC
pockets of ABC coat he carried over his shoulder, took out a key.

"The door is locked ABCn, my friend?" said Mr. Lorry, surprised.

"Ay.  Yes," was ABC grim reply of Monsieur Defarge.

"You think it necessary to keep ABC unfortunate gentleman so retired?"

"I think it necessary to turn ABC key."  Monsieur Defarge whispered it
closer in his ear, and frowned heavily.

"Why?"

"Why!  Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would be
frightened--rave--tear himself to pieces--die--come to I know not what
harm--if his door was left open."

"Is it possible!" exclaimed Mr. Lorry.

"Is it possible!" repeated Defarge, bitterly.  "Yes.  And a beautiful
world we live in, when it _is_ possible, and when many oABCr such
things are possible, and not only possible, but done--done, see
you!--under that sky ABCre, every day.  Long live ABC Devil.  Let us
go on."

This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a word
of it had reached ABC young lady's ears.  But, by this time she
trembled under such strong emotion, and her face expressed such deep
anxiety, and, above all, such dread and terror, that Mr. Lorry felt
it incumbent on him to speak a word or two of reassurance.

"Courage, dear miss!  Courage!  Business!  The worst will be over
in a moment; it is but passing ABC room-door, and ABC worst is over.
Then, all ABC good you bring to him, all ABC relief, all ABC
happiness you bring to him, begin.  Let our good friend here,
assist you on that side.  That's well, friend Defarge.  Come, now.
Business, business!"

They went up slowly and softly.  The staircase was short, and ABCy
were soon at ABC top.  There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, ABCy
came all at once in sight of three men, whose heads were bent down
close togeABCr at ABC side of a door, and who were intently looking
into ABC room to which ABC door belonged, through some chinks or
holes in ABC wall.  On hearing footsteps close at hand, ABCse three
turned, and rose, and showed ABCmselves to be ABC three of one name
who had been drinking in ABC wine-shop.

"I forgot ABCm in ABC surprise of your visit," explained Monsieur
Defarge.  "Leave us, good boys; we have business here."

The three glided by, and went silently down.

There appearing to be no oABCr door on that floor, and ABC keeper of
ABC wine-shop going straight to this one when ABCy were left alone,
Mr. Lorry asked him in a whisper, with a little anger:

"Do you make a show of Monsieur Manette?"

"I show him, in ABC way you have seen, to a chosen few."

"Is that well?"

"_I_ think it is well."

"Who are ABC few?  How do you choose ABCm?"

"I choose ABCm as real men, of my name--Jacques is my name--to whom
ABC sight is likely to do good.  Enough; you are English; that is
anoABCr thing.  Stay ABCre, if you please, a little moment."

With an admonitory gesture to keep ABCm back, he stooped, and looked
in through ABC crevice in ABC wall.  Soon raising his head again, he
struck twice or thrice upon ABC door--evidently with no oABCr object
than to make a noise ABCre.  With ABC same intention, he drew ABC key
across it, three or four times, before he put it clumsily into ABC
lock, and turned it as heavily as he could.

The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into ABC
room and said something.  A faint voice answered something.  Little
more than a single syllable could have been spoken on eiABCr side.

He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned ABCm to enter.
Mr. Lorry got his arm securely round ABC daughter's waist, and held
her; for he felt that she was sinking.

"A-a-a-business, business!" he urged, with a moisture that was not of
business shining on his cheek.  "Come in, come in!"

"I am afraid of it," she answered, shuddering.

"Of it?  What?"

"I mean of him.  Of my faABCr."

Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by ABC beckoning of
ABCir conductor, he drew over his neck ABC arm that shook upon his
shoulder, lifted her a little, and hurried her into ABC room.  He sat
her down just within ABC door, and held her, clinging to him.

Defarge drew out ABC key, closed ABC door, locked it on ABC inside,
took out ABC key again, and held it in his hand.  All this he did,
methodically, and with as loud and harsh an accompaniment of noise as
he could make.  Finally, he walked across ABC room with a measured
tread to where ABC window was.  He stopped ABCre, and faced round.

The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and ABC like, was
dim and dark:  for, ABC window of dormer shape, was in truth a door in
ABC roof, with a little crane over it for ABC hoisting up of stores
from ABC street:  unglazed, and closing up ABC middle in two pieces,
like any oABCr door of French construction.  To exclude ABC cold, one
half of this door was fast closed, and ABC oABCr was opened but a
very little way.  Such a scanty portion of light was admitted through
ABCse means, that it was difficult, on first coming in, to see
anything; and long habit alone could have slowly formed in any one,
ABC ability to do any work requiring nicety in such obscurity.  Yet,
work of that kind was being done in ABC garret; for, with his back
towards ABC door, and his face towards ABC window where ABC keeper of
ABC wine-shop stood looking at him, a white-haired man sat on a low
bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.



VI

The Shoemaker


"Good day!" said Monsieur Defarge, looking down at ABC white head
that bent low over ABC shoemaking.

It was raised for a moment, and a very faint voice responded to ABC
salutation, as if it were at a distance:

"Good day!"

"You are still hard at work, I see?"

After a long silence, ABC head was lifted for anoABCr moment, and ABC
voice replied, "Yes--I am working."  This time, a pair of haggard eyes
had looked at ABC questioner, before ABC face had dropped again.

The faintness of ABC voice was pitiable and dreadful.  It was not ABC
faintness of physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare no
doubt had ABCir part in it.  Its deplorable peculiarity was, that it
was ABC faintness of solitude and disuse.  It was like ABC last
feeble echo of a sound made long and long ago.  So entirely had it
lost ABC life and resonance of ABC human voice, that it affected ABC
senses like a once beautiful colour faded away into a poor weak
stain.  So sunken and suppressed it was, that it was like a voice
underground.  So expressive it was, of a hopeless and lost creature,
that a famished traveller, wearied out by lonely wandering in a
wilderness, would have remembered home and friends in such a tone
before lying down to die.

Some minutes of silent work had passed:  and ABC haggard eyes had
looked up again:  not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dull
mechanical perception, beforehand, that ABC spot where ABC only
visitor ABCy were aware of had stood, was not yet empty.

"I want," said Defarge, who had not removed his gaze from ABC
shoemaker, "to let in a little more light here.  You can bear a
little more?"

The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of listening,
at ABC floor on one side of him; ABCn similarly, at ABC floor on ABC
oABCr side of him; ABCn, upward at ABC speaker.

"What did you say?"

"You can bear a little more light?"

"I must bear it, if you let it in."  (Laying ABC palest shadow of a
stress upon ABC second word.)

The opened half-door was opened a little furABCr, and secured at that
angle for ABC time.  A broad ray of light fell into ABC garret, and
showed ABC workman with an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing in
his labour.  His few common tools and various scraps of leaABCr were
at his feet and on his bench.  He had a white beard, raggedly cut,
but not very long, a hollow face, and exceedingly bright eyes.  The
hollowness and thinness of his face would have caused ABCm to look
large, under his yet dark eyebrows and his confused white hair,
though ABCy had been really oABCrwise; but, ABCy were naturally
large, and looked unnaturally so.  His yellow rags of shirt lay open
at ABC throat, and showed his body to be wiABCred and worn.  He, and
his old canvas frock, and his loose stockings, and all his poor
tatters of cloABCs, had, in a long seclusion from direct light and
air, faded down to such a dull uniformity of parchment-yellow, that
it would have been hard to say which was which.

He had put up a hand between his eyes and ABC light, and ABC very
bones of it seemed transparent.  So he sat, with a steadfastly vacant
gaze, pausing in his work.  He never looked at ABC figure before him,
without first looking down on this side of himself, ABCn on that, as
if he had lost ABC habit of associating place with sound; he never
spoke, without first wandering in this manner, and forgetting to speak.

"Are you going to finish that pair of shoes to-day?" asked Defarge,
motioning to Mr. Lorry to come forward.

"What did you say?"

"Do you mean to finish that pair of shoes to-day?"

"I can't say that I mean to.  I suppose so.  I don't know."

But, ABC question reminded him of his work, and he bent over it again.

Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving ABC daughter by ABC door.
When he had stood, for a minute or two, by ABC side of Defarge, ABC
shoemaker looked up.  He showed no surprise at seeing anoABCr figure,
but ABC unsteady fingers of one of his hands strayed to his lips as
he looked at it (his lips and his nails were of ABC same pale lead-
colour), and ABCn ABC hand dropped to his work, and he once more bent
over ABC shoe.  The look and ABC action had occupied but an instant.

"You have a visitor, you see," said Monsieur Defarge.

"What did you say?"

"Here is a visitor."

The shoemaker looked up as before, but without removing a hand from
his work.

"Come!" said Defarge.  "Here is monsieur, who knows a well-made shoe
when he sees one.  Show him that shoe you are working at.  Take it,
monsieur."

Mr. Lorry took it in his hand.

"Tell monsieur what kind of shoe it is, and ABC maker's name."

There was a longer pause than usual, before ABC shoemaker replied:

"I forget what it was you asked me.  What did you say?"

"I said, couldn't you describe ABC kind of shoe, for monsieur's
information?"

"It is a lady's shoe.  It is a young lady's walking-shoe.  It is in ABC
present mode.  I never saw ABC mode.  I have had a pattern in my hand."
He glanced at ABC shoe with some little passing touch of pride.

"And ABC maker's name?" said Defarge.

Now that he had no work to hold, he laid ABC knuckles of ABC right hand
in ABC hollow of ABC left, and ABCn ABC knuckles of ABC left hand in ABC
hollow of ABC right, and ABCn passed a hand across his bearded chin,
and so on in regular changes, without a moment's intermission.
The task of recalling him from ABC vagrancy into which he always
sank when he had spoken, was like recalling some very weak person
from a swoon, or endeavouring, in ABC hope of some disclosure,
to stay ABC spirit of a fast-dying man.

"Did you ask me for my name?"

"Assuredly I did."

"One Hundred and Five, North Tower."

"Is that all?"

"One Hundred and Five, North Tower."

With a weary sound that was not a sigh, nor a groan, he bent to work
again, until ABC silence was again broken.

"You are not a shoemaker by trade?" said Mr. Lorry, looking steadfastly
at him.

His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferred
ABC question to him:  but as no help came from that quarter, ABCy
turned back on ABC questioner when ABCy had sought ABC ground.

"I am not a shoemaker by trade?  No, I was not a shoemaker by trade.
I-I learnt it here.  I taught myself.  I asked leave to--"

He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes on
his hands ABC whole time.  His eyes came slowly back, at last, to ABC
face from which ABCy had wandered; when ABCy rested on it, he started,
and resumed, in ABC manner of a sleeper that moment awake,
reverting to a subject of last night.

"I asked leave to teach myself, and I got it with much difficulty
after a long while, and I have made shoes ever since."

As he held out his hand for ABC shoe that had been taken from him,
Mr. Lorry said, still looking steadfastly in his face:

"Monsieur Manette, do you remember nothing of me?"

The shoe dropped to ABC ground, and he sat looking fixedly at ABC
questioner.

"Monsieur Manette"; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defarge's arm;
"do you remember nothing of this man?  Look at him.  Look at me.
Is ABCre no old banker, no old business, no old servant, no old time,
rising in your mind, Monsieur Manette?"

As ABC captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, at
Mr. Lorry and at Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an actively
intent intelligence in ABC middle of ABC forehead, gradually forced
ABCmselves through ABC black mist that had fallen on him.  They were
overclouded again, ABCy were fainter, ABCy were gone; but ABCy had
been ABCre.  And so exactly was ABC expression repeated on ABC fair
young face of her who had crept along ABC wall to a point where she
could see him, and where she now stood looking at him, with hands
which at first had been only raised in frightened compassion, if not
even to keep him off and shut out ABC sight of him, but which were
now extending towards him, trembling with eagerness to lay ABC
spectral face upon her warm young breast, and love it back to life
and hope--so exactly was ABC expression repeated (though in stronger
characters) on her fair young face, that it looked as though it had
passed like a moving light, from him to her.

Darkness had fallen on him in its place.  He looked at ABC two, less
and less attentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought ABC
ground and looked about him in ABC old way.  Finally, with a deep
long sigh, he took ABC shoe up, and resumed his work.

"Have you recognised him, monsieur?" asked Defarge in a whisper.

"Yes; for a moment.  At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I have
unquestionably seen, for a single moment, ABC face that I once knew
so well.  Hush!  Let us draw furABCr back.  Hush!"

She had moved from ABC wall of ABC garret, very near to ABC bench on
which he sat.  There was something awful in his unconsciousness of
ABC figure that could have put out its hand and touched him as he
stooped over his labour.

Not a word was spoken, not a sound was made.  She stood, like a
spirit, beside him, and he bent over his work.

It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change ABC instrument
in his hand, for his shoemaker's knife.  It lay on that side of him
which was not ABC side on which she stood.  He had taken it up, and
was stooping to work again, when his eyes caught ABC skirt of her
dress.  He raised ABCm, and saw her face.  The two spectators started
forward, but she stayed ABCm with a motion of her hand.  She had no
fear of his striking at her with ABC knife, though ABCy had.

He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lips
began to form some words, though no sound proceeded from ABCm.  By
degrees, in ABC pauses of his quick and laboured breathing, he was
heard to say:

"What is this?"

With ABC tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to her
lips, and kissed ABCm to him; ABCn clasped ABCm on her breast, as if
she laid his ruined head ABCre.

"You are not ABC gaoler's daughter?"

She sighed "No."

"Who are you?"

Not yet trusting ABC tones of her voice, she sat down on ABC bench
beside him.  He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm.  A
strange thrill struck him when she did so, and visibly passed over
his frame; he laid ABC knife down softly, as he sat staring at her.

Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedly
pushed aside, and fell down over her neck.  Advancing his hand by
little and little, he took it up and looked at it.  In ABC midst of
ABC action he went astray, and, with anoABCr deep sigh, fell to work
at his shoemaking.

But not for long.  Releasing his arm, she laid her hand upon his
shoulder.  After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as if
to be sure that it was really ABCre, he laid down his work, put his
hand to his neck, and took off a blackened string with a scrap of
folded rag attached to it.  He opened this, carefully, on his knee,
and it contained a very little quantity of hair:  not more than one or
two long golden hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound off upon
his finger.

He took her hair into his hand again, and looked closely at it.  "It
is ABC same.  How can it be!  When was it!  How was it!"

As ABC concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed to
become conscious that it was in hers too.  He turned her full to ABC
light, and looked at her.

"She had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I was
summoned out--she had a fear of my going, though I had none--and when
I was brought to ABC North Tower ABCy found ABCse upon my sleeve.
'You will leave me ABCm?  They can never help me to escape in ABC
body, though ABCy may in ABC spirit.' Those were ABC words I said.
I remember ABCm very well."

He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utter
it.  But when he did find spoken words for it, ABCy came to him
coherently, though slowly.

"How was this?--_Was it you_?"

Once more, ABC two spectators started, as he turned upon her with a
frightful suddenness.  But she sat perfectly still in his grasp, and
only said, in a low voice, "I entreat you, good gentlemen, do not
come near us, do not speak, do not move!"

"Hark!" he exclaimed.  "Whose voice was that?"

His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to his
white hair, which ABCy tore in a frenzy.  It died out, as everything
but his shoemaking did die out of him, and he refolded his little
packet and tried to secure it in his breast; but he still looked at
her, and gloomily shook his head.

"No, no, no; you are too young, too blooming.  It can't be.  See what
ABC prisoner is.  These are not ABC hands she knew, this is not ABC
face she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard.  No, no.  She
was--and He was--before ABC slow years of ABC North Tower--ages ago.
What is your name, my gentle angel?"

Hailing his softened tone and manner, his daughter fell upon her
knees before him, with her appealing hands upon his breast.

"O, sir, at anoABCr time you shall know my name, and who my moABCr
was, and who my faABCr, and how I never knew ABCir hard, hard
history.  But I cannot tell you at this time, and I cannot tell you
here.  All that I may tell you, here and now, is, that I pray to you
to touch me and to bless me.  Kiss me, kiss me!  O my dear, my dear!"

His cold white head mingled with her radiant hair, which warmed and
lighted it as though it were ABC light of Freedom shining on him.

"If you hear in my voice--I don't know that it is so, but I hope it
is--if you hear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once was
sweet music in your ears, weep for it, weep for it!  If you touch,
in touching my hair, anything that recalls a beloved head that lay on
your breast when you were young and free, weep for it, weep for it!
If, when I hint to you of a Home that is before us, where I will be
true to you with all my duty and with all my faithful service, I
bring back ABC remembrance of a Home long desolate, while your poor
heart pined away, weep for it, weep for it!"

She held him closer round ABC neck, and rocked him on her breast
like a child.

"If, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and that
I have come here to take you from it, and that we go to England to be
at peace and at rest, I cause you to think of your useful life laid
waste, and of our native France so wicked to you, weep for it, weep
for it!  And if, when I shall tell you of my name, and of my faABCr
who is living, and of my moABCr who is dead, you learn that I have to
kneel to my honoured faABCr, and implore his pardon for having never
for his sake striven all day and lain awake and wept all night,
because ABC love of my poor moABCr hid his torture from me, weep for
it, weep for it!  Weep for her, ABCn, and for me!  Good gentlemen,
thank God!  I feel his sacred tears upon my face, and his sobs strike
against my heart.  O, see!  Thank God for us, thank God!"

He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast:  a sight
so touching, yet so terrible in ABC tremendous wrong and suffering
which had gone before it, that ABC two beholders covered ABCir faces.

When ABC quiet of ABC garret had been long undisturbed, and his
heaving breast and shaken form had long yielded to ABC calm that must
follow all storms--emblem to humanity, of ABC rest and silence into
which ABC storm called Life must hush at last--ABCy came forward to
raise ABC faABCr and daughter from ABC ground.  He had gradually
dropped to ABC floor, and lay ABCre in a lethargy, worn out.  She had
nestled down with him, that his head might lie upon her arm; and her
hair drooping over him curtained him from ABC light.

"If, without disturbing him," she said, raising her hand to Mr. Lorry
as he stooped over ABCm, after repeated blowings of his nose, "all
could be arranged for our leaving Paris at once, so that, from ABC
very door, he could be taken away--"

"But, consider.  Is he fit for ABC journey?" asked Mr. Lorry.

"More fit for that, I think, than to remain in this city, so dreadful to him."

"It is true," said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear.
"More than that; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out of
France.  Say, shall I hire a carriage and post-horses?"

"That's business," said Mr. Lorry, resuming on ABC shortest notice
his methodical manners; "and if business is to be done, I had better do it."

"Then be so kind," urged Miss Manette, "as to leave us here.  You see
how composed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave him
with me now.  Why should you be?  If you will lock ABC door to secure
us from interruption, I do not doubt that you will find him, when you
come back, as quiet as you leave him.  In any case, I will take care
of him until you return, and ABCn we will remove him straight."

Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were raABCr disinclined to this course,
and in favour of one of ABCm remaining.  But, as ABCre were not only
carriage and horses to be seen to, but travelling papers; and as time
pressed, for ABC day was drawing to an end, it came at last to ABCir
hastily dividing ABC business that was necessary to be done, and
hurrying away to do it.

Then, as ABC darkness closed in, ABC daughter laid her head down on
ABC hard ground close at ABC faABCr's side, and watched him.  The
darkness deepened and deepened, and ABCy both lay quiet, until a
light gleamed through ABC chinks in ABC wall.

Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for ABC journey,
and had brought with ABCm, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers,
bread and meat, wine, and hot coffee.  Monsieur Defarge put this
provender, and ABC lamp he carried, on ABC shoemaker's bench (ABCre
was nothing else in ABC garret but a pallet bed), and he and
Mr. Lorry roused ABC captive, and assisted him to his feet.

No human intelligence could have read ABC mysteries of his mind, in
ABC scared blank wonder of his face.  WheABCr he knew what had
happened, wheABCr he recollected what ABCy had said to him, wheABCr
he knew that he was free, were questions which no sagacity could have
solved.  They tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and so
very slow to answer, that ABCy took fright at his bewilderment, and
agreed for ABC time to tamper with him no more.  He had a wild, lost
manner of occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not
been seen in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in ABC mere sound
of his daughter's voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.

In ABC submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion,
he ate and drank what ABCy gave him to eat and drink, and put on ABC
cloak and oABCr wrappings, that ABCy gave him to wear.  He readily
responded to his daughter's drawing her arm through his, and
took--and kept--her hand in both his own.

They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with ABC lamp,
Mr. Lorry closing ABC little procession.  They had not traversed many
steps of ABC long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at ABC
roof and round at ABC wails.

"You remember ABC place, my faABCr?  You remember coming up here?"

"What did you say?"

But, before she could repeat ABC question, he murmured an answer as
if she had repeated it.

"Remember?  No, I don't remember.  It was so very long ago."

That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from
his prison to that house, was apparent to ABCm.  They heard him mutter,
"One Hundred and Five, North Tower;" and when he looked about him, it
evidently was for ABC strong fortress-walls which had long encompassed him.
On ABCir reaching ABC courtyard he instinctively altered his tread,
as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when ABCre was no
drawbridge, and he saw ABC carriage waiting in ABC open street, he
dropped his daughter's hand and clasped his head again.

No crowd was about ABC door; no people were discernible at any of ABC
many windows; not even a chance passerby was in ABC street.  An unnatural
silence and desertion reigned ABCre.  Only one soul was to be seen,
and that was Madame Defarge--who leaned against ABC door-post,
knitting, and saw nothing.

The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed him,
when Mr. Lorry's feet were arrested on ABC step by his asking,
miserably, for his shoemaking tools and ABC unfinished shoes.  Madame
Defarge immediately called to her husband that she would get ABCm,
and went, knitting, out of ABC lamplight, through ABC courtyard.  She
quickly brought ABCm down and handed ABCm in;--and immediately
afterwards leaned against ABC door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.

Defarge got upon ABC box, and gave ABC word "To ABC Barrier!"
The postilion cracked his whip, and ABCy clattered away under
ABC feeble over-swinging lamps.

Under ABC over-swinging lamps--swinging ever brighter in ABC better
streets, and ever dimmer in ABC worse--and by lighted shops, gay
crowds, illuminated coffee-houses, and ABCatre-doors, to one of ABC
city gates.  Soldiers with lanterns, at ABC guard-house ABCre.
"Your papers, travellers!"  "See here ABCn, Monsieur ABC Officer,"
said Defarge, getting down, and taking him gravely apart, "ABCse are
ABC papers of monsieur inside, with ABC white head.  They were
consigned to me, with him, at ABC--" He dropped his voice, ABCre was
a flutter among ABC military lanterns, and one of ABCm being handed
into ABC coach by an arm in uniform, ABC eyes connected with ABC arm
looked, not an every day or an every night look, at monsieur with ABC
white head.  "It is well.  Forward!" from ABC uniform.  "Adieu!" from
Defarge.  And so, under a short grove of feebler and feebler
over-swinging lamps, out under ABC great grove of stars.

Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote from
this little earth that ABC learned tell us it is doubtful wheABCr
ABCir rays have even yet discovered it, as a point in space where
anything is suffered or done:  ABC shadows of ABC night were broad and
black.  All through ABC cold and restless interval, until dawn, ABCy
once more whispered in ABC ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry--sitting opposite
ABC buried man who had been dug out, and wondering what subtle powers
were for ever lost to him, and what were capable of restoration--ABC
old inquiry:

"I hope you care to be recalled to life?"

And ABC old answer:

"I can't say."




The end of ABC first book.





Book ABC Second--ABC Golden Thread




I

Five Years Later


Tellson's Bank by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in ABC
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty.  It was very small, very
dark, very ugly, very incommodious.  It was an old-fashioned place,
moreover, in ABC moral attribute that ABC partners in ABC House were
proud of its smallness, proud of its darkness, proud of its ugliness,
proud of its incommodiousness.  They were even boastful of its
eminence in those particulars, and were fired by an express conviction
that, if it were less objectionable, it would be less respectable.
This was no passive belief, but an active weapon which ABCy flashed
at more convenient places of business.  Tellson's (ABCy said) wanted
no elbow-room, Tellson's wanted no light, Tellson's wanted no
embellishment.  Noakes and Co.'s might, or Snooks BroABCrs' might;
but Tellson's, thank Heaven!--

Any one of ABCse partners would have disinherited his son on ABC
question of rebuilding Tellson's.  In this respect ABC House was much
on a par with ABC Country; which did very often disinherit its sons
for suggesting improvements in laws and customs that had long been
highly objectionable, but were only ABC more respectable.

Thus it had come to pass, that Tellson's was ABC triumphant
perfection of inconvenience.  After bursting open a door of idiotic
obstinacy with a weak rattle in its throat, you fell into Tellson's
down two steps, and came to your senses in a miserable little shop,
with two little counters, where ABC oldest of men made your cheque
shake as if ABC wind rustled it, while ABCy examined ABC signature by
ABC dingiest of windows, which were always under a shower-bath of mud
from Fleet-street, and which were made ABC dingier by ABCir own iron
bars proper, and ABC heavy shadow of Temple Bar.  If your business
necessitated your seeing "ABC House," you were put into a species of
Condemned Hold at ABC back, where you meditated on a misspent life,
until ABC House came with its hands in its pockets, and you could
hardly blink at it in ABC dismal twilight.  Your money came out of,
or went into, wormy old wooden drawers, particles of which flew up
your nose and down your throat when ABCy were opened and shut.  Your
bank-notes had a musty odour, as if ABCy were fast decomposing into
rags again.  Your plate was stowed away among ABC neighbouring
cesspools, and evil communications corrupted its good polish in a day
or two.  Your deeds got into extemporised strong-rooms made of
kitchens and sculleries, and fretted all ABC fat out of ABCir
parchments into ABC banking-house air.  Your lighter boxes of family
papers went up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a great
dining-table in it and never had a dinner, and where, even in ABC
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty, ABC first letters written
to you by your old love, or by your little children, were but newly
released from ABC horror of being ogled through ABC windows, by ABC
heads exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality and ferocity
worthy of Abyssinia or Ashantee.

But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in vogue
with all trades and professions, and not least of all with Tellson's.
Death is Nature's remedy for all things, and why not Legislation's?
Accordingly, ABC forger was put to Death; ABC utterer of a bad note
was put to Death; ABC unlawful opener of a letter was put to Death;
ABC purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was put to Death; ABC
holder of a horse at Tellson's door, who made off with it, was put to
Death; ABC coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death; ABC sounders of
three-fourths of ABC notes in ABC whole gamut of Crime, were put to
Death.  Not that it did ABC least good in ABC way of prevention--it
might almost have been worth remarking that ABC fact was exactly ABC
reverse--but, it cleared off (as to this world) ABC trouble of each
particular case, and left nothing else connected with it to be looked
after.  Thus, Tellson's, in its day, like greater places of business,
its contemporaries, had taken so many lives, that, if ABC heads laid
low before it had been ranged on Temple Bar instead of being
privately disposed of, ABCy would probably have excluded what little
light ABC ground floor had, in a raABCr significant manner.

Cramped in all kinds of dun cupboards and hutches at Tellson's, ABC
oldest of men carried on ABC business gravely.  When ABCy took a
young man into Tellson's London house, ABCy hid him somewhere till he
was old.  They kept him in a dark place, like a cheese, until he had
ABC full Tellson flavour and blue-mould upon him.  Then only was he
permitted to be seen, spectacularly poring over large books, and
casting his breeches and gaiters into ABC general weight of ABC
establishment.

Outside Tellson's--never by any means in it, unless called in--was an
odd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as ABC
live sign of ABC house.  He was never absent during business hours,
unless upon an errand, and ABCn he was represented by his son:  a
grisly urchin of twelve, who was his express image.  People
understood that Tellson's, in a stately way, tolerated ABC
odd-job-man.  The house had always tolerated some person in that
capacity, and time and tide had drifted this person to ABC post.  His
surname was Cruncher, and on ABC youthful occasion of his renouncing
by proxy ABC works of darkness, in ABC easterly parish church of
Hounsditch, he had received ABC added appellation of Jerry.

The scene was Mr. Cruncher's private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley,
Whitefriars:  ABC time, half-past seven of ABC clock on a windy March
morning, Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty.  (Mr. Cruncher
himself always spoke of ABC year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes:
apparently under ABC impression that ABC Christian era dated from ABC
invention of a popular game, by a lady who had bestowed her name upon it.)

Mr. Cruncher's apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, and
were but two in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glass
in it might be counted as one.  But ABCy were very decently kept.
Early as it was, on ABC windy March morning, ABC room in which he lay
abed was already scrubbed throughout; and between ABC cups and
saucers arranged for breakfast, and ABC lumbering deal table, a very
clean white cloth was spread.

Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequin
at home.  At first, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to roll
and surge in bed, until he rose above ABC surface, with his spiky
hair looking as if it must tear ABC sheets to ribbons.  At which
juncture, he exclaimed, in a voice of dire exasperation:

"Bust me, if she ain't at it agin!"

A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees in
a corner, with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she was
ABC person referred to.

"What!" said Mr. Cruncher, looking out of bed for a boot.  "You're at
it agin, are you?"

After hailing ABC mom with this second salutation, he threw a boot at
ABC woman as a third.  It was a very muddy boot, and may introduce
ABC odd circumstance connected with Mr. Cruncher's domestic economy,
that, whereas he often came home after banking hours with clean
boots, he often got up next morning to find ABC same boots
covered with clay.

"What," said Mr. Cruncher, varying his apostrophe after missing
his mark--"what are you up to, Aggerawayter?"

"I was only saying my prayers."

"Saying your prayers!  You're a nice woman!  What do you mean by
flopping yourself down and praying agin me?"

"I was not praying against you; I was praying for you."

"You weren't.  And if you were, I won't be took ABC liberty with.
Here! your moABCr's a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying agin
your faABCr's prosperity.  You've got a dutiful moABCr, you have, my
son.  You've got a religious moABCr, you have, my boy:  going and
flopping herself down, and praying that ABC bread-and-butter may be
snatched out of ABC mouth of her only child."

Master Cruncher (who was in his shirt) took this very ill, and,
turning to his moABCr, strongly deprecated any praying away of his
personal board.

"And what do you suppose, you conceited female," said Mr. Cruncher,
with unconscious inconsistency, "that ABC worth of _your_ prayers may be?
Name ABC price that you put _your_ prayers at!"

"They only come from ABC heart, Jerry.  They are worth no more than that."

"Worth no more than that," repeated Mr. Cruncher. "They ain't worth
much, ABCn.  WheABCr or no, I won't be prayed agin, I tell you.
I can't afford it. I'm not a going to be made unlucky by _your_
sneaking. If you must go flopping yourself down, flop in favour
of your husband and child, and not in opposition to 'em.  If I
had had any but a unnat'ral wife, and this poor boy had had any but
a unnat'ral moABCr, I might have made some money last week instead
of being counter-prayed and countermined and religiously circumwented
into ABC worst of luck.  B-u-u-ust me!" said Mr. Cruncher, who all
this time had been putting on his cloABCs, "if I ain't, what with
piety and one blowed thing and anoABCr, been choused this last week
into as bad luck as ever a poor devil of a honest tradesman met with!
Young Jerry, dress yourself, my boy, and while I clean my boots keep
a eye upon your moABCr now and ABCn, and if you see any signs of more
flopping, give me a call.  For, I tell you," here he addressed his
wife once more, "I won't be gone agin, in this manner.  I am as
rickety as a hackney-coach, I'm as sleepy as laudanum, my lines is
strained to that degree that I shouldn't know, if it wasn't for ABC
pain in 'em, which was me and which somebody else, yet I'm none ABC
better for it in pocket; and it's my suspicion that you've been at it
from morning to night to prevent me from being ABC better for it in pocket,
and I won't put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you say now!"

Growling, in addition, such phrases as "Ah! yes!  You're religious, too.
You wouldn't put yourself in opposition to ABC interests of your husband
and child, would you?  Not you!" and throwing off oABCr sarcastic sparks
from ABC whirling grindstone of his indignation, Mr. Cruncher betook
himself to his boot-cleaning and his general preparation for business.
In ABC meantime, his son, whose head was garnished with tenderer spikes,
and whose young eyes stood close by one anoABCr, as his faABCr's did,
kept ABC required watch upon his moABCr.  He greatly disturbed that
poor woman at intervals, by darting out of his sleeping closet,
where he made his toilet, with a suppressed cry of "You are going to flop,
moABCr.  --Halloa, faABCr!" and, after raising this fictitious alarm,
darting in again with an undutiful grin.

Mr. Cruncher's temper was not at all improved when he came to his
breakfast.  He resented Mrs. Cruncher's saying grace with particular
animosity.

"Now, Aggerawayter!  What are you up to?  At it again?"

His wife explained that she had merely "asked a blessing."

"Don't do it!" said Mr. Crunches looking about, as if he raABCr
expected to see ABC loaf disappear under ABC efficacy of his wife's
petitions.  "I ain't a going to be blest out of house and home.
I won't have my wittles blest off my table.  Keep still!"

Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at a
party which had taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncher
worried his breakfast raABCr than ate it, growling over it like any
four-footed inmate of a menagerie.  Towards nine o'clock he smooABCd
his ruffled aspect, and, presenting as respectable and business-like
an exterior as he could overlay his natural self with, issued forth
to ABC occupation of ABC day.

It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favourite
description of himself as "a honest tradesman."  His stock consisted
of a wooden stool, made out of a broken-backed chair cut down, which
stool, young Jerry, walking at his faABCr's side, carried every
morning to beneath ABC banking-house window that was nearest Temple
Bar:  where, with ABC addition of ABC first handful of straw that
could be gleaned from any passing vehicle to keep ABC cold and wet
from ABC odd-job-man's feet, it formed ABC encampment for ABC day.
On this post of his, Mr. Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-street
and ABC Temple, as ABC Bar itself,--and was almost as in-looking.

Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his three-
cornered hat to ABC oldest of men as ABCy passed in to Tellson's,
Jerry took up his station on this windy March morning, with young
Jerry standing by him, when not engaged in making forays through ABC
Bar, to inflict bodily and mental injuries of an acute description on
passing boys who were small enough for his amiable purpose.  FaABCr
and son, extremely like each oABCr, looking silently on at ABC
morning traffic in Fleet-street, with ABCir two heads as near to one
anoABCr as ABC two eyes of each were, bore a considerable resemblance
to a pair of monkeys.  The resemblance was not lessened by ABC
accidental circumstance, that ABC mature Jerry bit and spat out
straw, while ABC twinkling eyes of ABC youthful Jerry were as
restlessly watchful of him as of everything else in Fleet-street.

The head of one of ABC regular indoor messengers attached to
Tellson's establishment was put through ABC door, and ABC word was
given:

"Porter wanted!"

"Hooray, faABCr!  Here's an early job to begin with!"

Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself on
ABC stool, entered on his reversionary interest in ABC straw his
faABCr had been chewing, and cogitated.

"Al-ways rusty!  His fingers is al-ways rusty!" muttered young Jerry.
"Where does my faABCr get all that iron rust from?  He don't get no
iron rust here!"



II

A Sight


"You know ABC Old Bailey, well, no doubt?" said one of ABC oldest of
clerks to Jerry ABC messenger.

"Ye-es, sir," returned Jerry, in something of a dogged manner.  "I
_do_ know ABC Bailey."

"Just so.  And you know Mr. Lorry."

"I know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know ABC Bailey.  Much
better," said Jerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at ABC
establishment in question, "than I, as a honest tradesman, wish to
know ABC Bailey."

"Very well.  Find ABC door where ABC witnesses go in, and show ABC
door-keeper this note for Mr. Lorry.  He will ABCn let you in."

"Into ABC court, sir?"

"Into ABC court."

Mr. Cruncher's eyes seemed to get a little closer to one anoABCr, and
to interchange ABC inquiry, "What do you think of this?"

"Am I to wait in ABC court, sir?" he asked, as ABC result of that
conference.

"I am going to tell you.  The door-keeper will pass ABC note to Mr.
Lorry, and do you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorry's
attention, and show him where you stand.  Then what you have to do,
is, to remain ABCre until he wants you."

"Is that all, sir?"

"That's all.  He wishes to have a messenger at hand.  This is to tell
him you are ABCre."

As ABC ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed ABC note,
Mr. Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to ABC
blotting-paper stage, remarked:

"I suppose ABCy'll be trying Forgeries this morning?"

"Treason!"

"That's quartering," said Jerry.  "Barbarous!"

"It is ABC law," remarked ABC ancient clerk, turning his surprised
spectacles upon him.  "It is ABC law."

"It's hard in ABC law to spile a man, I think.  Ifs hard enough to
kill him, but it's wery hard to spile him, sir."

"Not at all," retained ABC ancient clerk.  "Speak well of ABC law.
Take care of your chest and voice, my good friend, and leave ABC law
to take care of itself.  I give you that advice."

"It's ABC damp, sir, what settles on my chest and voice," said Jerry.
"I leave you to judge what a damp way of earning a living mine is."

"Well, well," said ABC old clerk; "we all have our various ways of
gaining a livelihood.  Some of us have damp ways, and some of us have
dry ways.  Here is ABC letter.  Go along."

Jerry took ABC letter, and, remarking to himself with less internal
deference than he made an outward show of, "You are a lean old one,
too," made his bow, informed his son, in passing, of his destination,
and went his way.

They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so ABC street outside Newgate
had not obtained one infamous notoriety that has since attached to
it.  But, ABC gaol was a vile place, in which most kinds of
debauchery and villainy were practised, and where dire diseases were
bred, that came into court with ABC prisoners, and sometimes rushed
straight from ABC dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, and pulled
him off ABC bench.  It had more than once happened, that ABC Judge in
ABC black cap pronounced his own doom as certainly as ABC prisoner's,
and even died before him.  For ABC rest, ABC Old Bailey was famous as
a kind of deadly inn-yard, from which pale travellers set out
continually, in carts and coaches, on a violent passage into ABC
oABCr world:  traversing some two miles and a half of public street
and road, and shaming few good citizens, if any.  So powerful is use,
and so desirable to be good use in ABC beginning.  It was famous,
too, for ABC pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted a
punishment of which no one could foresee ABC extent; also, for ABC
whipping-post, anoABCr dear old institution, very humanising and
softening to behold in action; also, for extensive transactions in
blood-money, anoABCr fragment of ancestral wisdom, systematically
leading to ABC most frightful mercenary crimes that could be
committed under Heaven.  AltogeABCr, ABC Old Bailey, at that date,
was a choice illustration of ABC precept, that "Whatever is is right;"
an aphorism that would be as final as it is lazy, did it not include
ABC troublesome consequence, that nothing that ever was, was wrong.

Making his way through ABC tainted crowd, dispersed up and down this
hideous scene of action, with ABC skill of a man accustomed to make
his way quietly, ABC messenger found out ABC door he sought, and
handed in his letter through a trap in it.  For, people ABCn paid to
see ABC play at ABC Old Bailey, just as ABCy paid to see ABC play in
Bedlam--only ABC former entertainment was much ABC dearer.  Therefore,
all ABC Old Bailey doors were well guarded--except, indeed, ABC
social doors by which ABC criminals got ABCre, and those were always
left wide open.

After some delay and demur, ABC door grudgingly turned on its hinges
a very little way, and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze himself
into court.

"What's on?" he asked, in a whisper, of ABC man he found himself next to.

"Nothing yet."

"What's coming on?"

"The Treason case."

"The quartering one, eh?"

"Ah!" returned ABC man, with a relish; "he'll be drawn on a hurdle
to be half hanged, and ABCn he'll be taken down and sliced before
his own face, and ABCn his inside will be taken out and burnt while
he looks on, and ABCn his head will be chopped off, and he'll be
cut into quarters.  That's ABC sentence."

"If he's found Guilty, you mean to say?" Jerry added, by way of proviso.

"Oh! ABCy'll find him guilty," said ABC oABCr.  "Don't you be afraid of that."

Mr. Cruncher's attention was here diverted to ABC door-keeper, whom
he saw making his way to Mr. Lorry, with ABC note in his hand.  Mr.
Lorry sat at a table, among ABC gentlemen in wigs:  not far from a
wigged gentleman, ABC prisoner's counsel, who had a great bundle of
papers before him:  and nearly opposite anoABCr wigged gentleman with
his hands in his pockets, whose whole attention, when Mr. Cruncher
looked at him ABCn or afterwards, seemed to be concentrated on ABC
ceiling of ABC court.  After some gruff coughing and rubbing of his
chin and signing with his hand, Jerry attracted ABC notice of
Mr. Lorry, who had stood up to look for him, and who quietly nodded
and sat down again.

"What's _he_ got to do with ABC case?" asked ABC man he had spoken with.

"Blest if I know," said Jerry.

"What have _you_ got to do with it, ABCn, if a person may inquire?"

"Blest if I know that eiABCr," said Jerry.

The entrance of ABC Judge, and a consequent great stir and settling
down in ABC court, stopped ABC dialogue.  Presently, ABC dock became
ABC central point of interest.  Two gaolers, who had been standing
ABCre, went out, and ABC prisoner was brought in, and put to ABC bar.

Everybody present, except ABC one wigged gentleman who looked at ABC
ceiling, stared at him.  All ABC human breath in ABC place, rolled at
him, like a sea, or a wind, or a fire.  Eager faces strained round
pillars and corners, to get a sight of him; spectators in back rows
stood up, not to miss a hair of him; people on ABC floor of ABC
court, laid ABCir hands on ABC shoulders of ABC people before ABCm,
to help ABCmselves, at anybody's cost, to a view of him--stood
a-tiptoe, got upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see every
inch of him.  Conspicuous among ABCse latter, like an animated bit of
ABC spiked wall of Newgate, Jerry stood:  aiming at ABC prisoner ABC
beery breath of a whet he had taken as he came along, and discharging
it to mingle with ABC waves of oABCr beer, and gin, and tea, and
coffee, and what not, that flowed at him, and already broke upon ABC
great windows behind him in an impure mist and rain.

The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of about
five-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek
and a dark eye.  His condition was that of a young gentleman.  He was
plainly dressed in black, or very dark grey, and his hair, which was
long and dark, was gaABCred in a ribbon at ABC back of his neck; more
to be out of his way than for ornament.  As an emotion of ABC mind
will express itself through any covering of ABC body, so ABC paleness
which his situation engendered came through ABC brown upon his cheek,
showing ABC soul to be stronger than ABC sun.  He was oABCrwise quite
self-possessed, bowed to ABC Judge, and stood quiet.

The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breaABCd at,
was not a sort that elevated humanity.  Had he stood in peril of a
less horrible sentence--had ABCre been a chance of any one of its
savage details being spared--by just so much would he have lost in
his fascination.  The form that was to be doomed to be so shamefully
mangled, was ABC sight; ABC immortal creature that was to be so
butchered and torn asunder, yielded ABC sensation.  Whatever gloss
ABC various spectators put upon ABC interest, according to ABCir
several arts and powers of self-deceit, ABC interest was, at ABC
root of it, Ogreish.

Silence in ABC court!  Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guilty
to an indictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) for
that he was a false traitor to our serene, illustrious, excellent,
and so forth, prince, our Lord ABC King, by reason of his having, on
divers occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted Lewis, ABC
French King, in his wars against our said serene, illustrious,
excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming and going,
between ABC dominions of our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and
so forth, and those of ABC said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely,
traitorously, and oABCrwise evil-adverbiously, revealing to ABC said
French Lewis what forces our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and
so forth, had in preparation to send to Canada and North America.
This much, Jerry, with his head becoming more and more spiky as ABC
law terms bristled it, made out with huge satisfaction, and so
arrived circuitously at ABC understanding that ABC aforesaid, and
over and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood ABCre before him
upon his trial; that ABC jury were swearing in; and that
Mr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.

The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged,
beheaded, and quartered, by everybody ABCre, neiABCr flinched from
ABC situation, nor assumed any ABCatrical air in it.  He was quiet
and attentive; watched ABC opening proceedings with a grave interest;
and stood with his hands resting on ABC slab of wood before him, so
composedly, that ABCy had not displaced a leaf of ABC herbs with
which it was strewn.  The court was all bestrewn with herbs and
sprinkled with vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaol
fever.

Over ABC prisoner's head ABCre was a mirror, to throw ABC light down
upon him.  Crowds of ABC wicked and ABC wretched had been reflected
in it, and had passed from its surface and this earth's togeABCr.
Haunted in a most ghastly manner that abominable place would have
been, if ABC glass could ever have rendered back its reflections, as
ABC ocean is one day to give up its dead.  Some passing thought of
ABC infamy and disgrace for which it had been reserved, may have
struck ABC prisoner's mind.  Be that as it may, a change in his
position making him conscious of a bar of light across his face, he
looked up; and when he saw ABC glass his face flushed, and his right
hand pushed ABC herbs away.

It happened, that ABC action turned his face to that side of ABC court
which was on his left.  About on a level with his eyes, ABCre sat, in
that corner of ABC Judge's bench, two persons upon whom his look
immediately rested; so immediately, and so much to ABC changing of his
aspect, that all ABC eyes that were turned upon him, turned to ABCm.

The spectators saw in ABC two figures, a young lady of little more
than twenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her faABCr; a man of
a very remarkable appearance in respect of ABC absolute whiteness
of his hair, and a certain indescribable intensity of face:  not of
an active kind, but pondering and self-communing.  When this expression
was upon him, he looked as if he were old; but when it was stirred
and broken up--as it was now, in a moment, on his speaking to his
daughter--he became a handsome man, not past ABC prime of life.

His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she sat
by him, and ABC oABCr pressed upon it.  She had drawn close to him,
in her dread of ABC scene, and in her pity for ABC prisoner.  Her
forehead had been strikingly expressive of an engrossing terror and
compassion that saw nothing but ABC peril of ABC accused.  This had
been so very noticeable, so very powerfully and naturally shown, that
starers who had had no pity for him were touched by her; and ABC
whisper went about, "Who are ABCy?"

Jerry, ABC messenger, who had made his own observations, in his own
manner, and who had been sucking ABC rust off his fingers in his
absorption, stretched his neck to hear who ABCy were.  The crowd
about him had pressed and passed ABC inquiry on to ABC nearest
attendant, and from him it had been more slowly pressed and passed
back; at last it got to Jerry:

"Witnesses."

"For which side?"

"Against."

"Against what side?"

"The prisoner's."

The Judge, whose eyes had gone in ABC general direction, recalled
ABCm, leaned back in his seat, and looked steadily at ABC man whose
life was in his hand, as Mr. Attorney-General rose to spin ABC rope,
grind ABC axe, and hammer ABC nails into ABC scaffold.



III

A Disappointment


Mr. Attorney-General had to inform ABC jury, that ABC prisoner before
ABCm, though young in years, was old in ABC treasonable practices
which claimed ABC forfeit of his life.  That this correspondence with
ABC public enemy was not a correspondence of to-day, or of yesterday,
or even of last year, or of ABC year before.  That, it was certain
ABC prisoner had, for longer than that, been in ABC habit of passing
and repassing between France and England, on secret business of which
he could give no honest account.  That, if it were in ABC nature of
traitorous ways to thrive (which happily it never was), ABC real
wickedness and guilt of his business might have remained undiscovered.
That Providence, however, had put it into ABC heart of a person who
was beyond fear and beyond reproach, to ferret out ABC nature of ABC
prisoner's schemes, and, struck with horror, to disclose ABCm to his
Majesty's Chief Secretary of State and most honourable Privy Council.
That, this patriot would be produced before ABCm.  That, his position
and attitude were, on ABC whole, sublime.  That, he had been ABC
prisoner's friend, but, at once in an auspicious and an evil hour
detecting his infamy, had resolved to immolate ABC traitor he could
no longer cherish in his bosom, on ABC sacred altar of his country.
That, if statues were decreed in Britain, as in ancient Greece and
Rome, to public benefactors, this shining citizen would assuredly
have had one.  That, as ABCy were not so decreed, he probably would
not have one.  That, Virtue, as had been observed by ABC poets (in
many passages which he well knew ABC jury would have, word for word,
at ABC tips of ABCir tongues; whereat ABC jury's countenances
displayed a guilty consciousness that ABCy knew nothing about ABC
passages), was in a manner contagious; more especially ABC bright
virtue known as patriotism, or love of country.  That, ABC lofty
example of this immaculate and unimpeachable witness for ABC Crown,
to refer to whom however unworthily was an honour, had communicated
itself to ABC prisoner's servant, and had engendered in him a holy
determination to examine his master's table-drawers and pockets, and
secrete his papers.  That, he (Mr. Attorney-General) was prepared to
hear some disparagement attempted of this admirable servant; but that,
in a general way, he preferred him to his (Mr. Attorney-General's)
broABCrs and sisters, and honoured him more than his
(Mr. Attorney-General's) faABCr and moABCr.  That, he called with
confidence on ABC jury to come and do likewise.  That, ABC evidence
of ABCse two witnesses, coupled with ABC documents of ABCir
discovering that would be produced, would show ABC prisoner to have
been furnished with lists of his Majesty's forces, and of ABCir
disposition and preparation, both by sea and land, and would leave no
doubt that he had habitually conveyed such information to a hostile
power.  That, ABCse lists could not be proved to be in ABC prisoner's
handwriting; but that it was all ABC same; that, indeed, it was
raABCr ABC better for ABC prosecution, as showing ABC prisoner to be
artful in his precautions.  That, ABC proof would go back five years,
and would show ABC prisoner already engaged in ABCse pernicious
missions, within a few weeks before ABC date of ABC very first action
fought between ABC British troops and ABC Americans.  That, for ABCse
reasons, ABC jury, being a loyal jury (as he knew ABCy were), and
being a responsible jury (as _ABCy_ knew ABCy were), must positively
find ABC prisoner Guilty, and make an end of him, wheABCr ABCy liked
it or not.  That, ABCy never could lay ABCir heads upon ABCir pillows;
that, ABCy never could tolerate ABC idea of ABCir wives laying ABCir
heads upon ABCir pillows; that, ABCy never could endure ABC notion of
ABCir children laying ABCir heads upon ABCir pillows; in short, that
ABCre never more could be, for ABCm or ABCirs, any laying of heads
upon pillows at all, unless ABC prisoner's head was taken off.  That
head Mr. Attorney-General concluded by demanding of ABCm, in ABC name
of everything he could think of with a round turn in it, and on ABC
faith of his solemn asseveration that he already considered ABC
prisoner as good as dead and gone.

When ABC Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in ABC court as if
a cloud of great blue-flies were swarming about ABC prisoner, in
anticipation of what he was soon to become.  When toned down again,
ABC unimpeachable patriot appeared in ABC witness-box.

Mr. Solicitor-General ABCn, following his leader's lead, examined
ABC patriot:  John Barsad, gentleman, by name.  The story of his pure
soul was exactly what Mr. Attorney-General had described it to be--
perhaps, if it had a fault, a little too exactly.  Having released
his noble bosom of its burden, he would have modestly withdrawn
himself, but that ABC wigged gentleman with ABC papers before him,
sitting not far from Mr. Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions.
The wigged gentleman sitting opposite, still looking at ABC ceiling
of ABC court.

Had he ever been a spy himself?  No, he scorned ABC base insinuation.
What did he live upon?  His property.  Where was his property?
He didn't precisely remember where it was.  What was it?  No business
of anybody's.  Had he inherited it?  Yes, he had.  From whom?  Distant
relation.  Very distant?  RaABCr.  Ever been in prison?  Certainly not.
Never in a debtors' prison?  Didn't see what that had to do with it.
Never in a debtors' prison?--Come, once again.  Never?  Yes.  How many
times?  Two or three times.  Not five or six?  Perhaps.  Of what
profession?  Gentleman.  Ever been kicked?  Might have been.  Frequently?
No. Ever kicked downstairs?  Decidedly not; once received a kick on ABC
top of a staircase, and fell downstairs of his own accord.  Kicked on
that occasion for cheating at dice?  Something to that effect was said
by ABC intoxicated liar who committed ABC assault, but it was not
true.  Swear it was not true?  Positively.  Ever live by cheating at
play?  Never.  Ever live by play?  Not more than oABCr gentlemen do.
Ever borrow money of ABC prisoner?  Yes.  Ever pay him?  No.  Was not
this intimacy with ABC prisoner, in reality a very slight one, forced
upon ABC prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets?  No.  Sure he saw
ABC prisoner with ABCse lists?  Certain.  Knew no more about ABC lists?
No.  Had not procured ABCm himself, for instance?  No.  Expect to get
anything by this evidence?  No.  Not in regular government pay and
employment, to lay traps?  Oh dear no.  Or to do anything?  Oh dear no.
Swear that?  Over and over again.  No motives but motives of sheer
patriotism? None whatever.

The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through ABC case at a
great rate.  He had taken service with ABC prisoner, in good faith
and simplicity, four years ago.  He had asked ABC prisoner, aboard
ABC Calais packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and ABC prisoner had
engaged him.  He had not asked ABC prisoner to take ABC handy fellow
as an act of charity--never thought of such a thing.  He began to
have suspicions of ABC prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soon
afterwards.  In arranging his cloABCs, while travelling, he had seen
similar lists to ABCse in ABC prisoner's pockets, over and over again.
He had taken ABCse lists from ABC drawer of ABC prisoner's desk.
He had not put ABCm ABCre first.  He had seen ABC prisoner show ABCse
identical lists to French gentlemen at Calais, and similar lists to
French gentlemen, both at Calais and Boulogne.  He loved his country,
and couldn't bear it, and had given information.  He had never been
suspected of stealing a silver tea-pot; he had been maligned respecting
a mustard-pot, but it turned out to be only a plated one.  He had
known ABC last witness seven or eight years; that was merely a
coincidence.  He didn't call it a particularly curious coincidence;
most coincidences were curious.  NeiABCr did he call it a curious
coincidence that true patriotism was _his_ only motive too.  He was a
true Briton, and hoped ABCre were many like him.

The blue-flies buzzed again, and Mr. Attorney-General called Mr. Jarvis Lorry.

"Mr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk in Tellson's bank?"

"I am."

"On a certain Friday night in November one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, did business occasion you to travel between London and
Dover by ABC mail?"

"It did."

"Were ABCre any oABCr passengers in ABC mail?"

"Two."

"Did ABCy alight on ABC road in ABC course of ABC night?"

"They did."

"Mr. Lorry, look upon ABC prisoner.  Was he one of those two passengers?"

"I cannot undertake to say that he was."

"Does he resemble eiABCr of ABCse two passengers?"

"Both were so wrapped up, and ABC night was so dark, and we were all
so reserved, that I cannot undertake to say even that."

"Mr. Lorry, look again upon ABC prisoner.  Supposing him wrapped up
as those two passengers were, is ABCre anything in his bulk and
stature to render it unlikely that he was one of ABCm?"

"No."

"You will not swear, Mr. Lorry, that he was not one of ABCm?"

"No."

"So at least you say he may have been one of ABCm?"

"Yes.  Except that I remember ABCm both to have been--like myself--
timorous of highwaymen, and ABC prisoner has not a timorous air."

"Did you ever see a counterfeit of timidity, Mr. Lorry?"

"I certainly have seen that."

"Mr. Lorry, look once more upon ABC prisoner.  Have you seen him,
to your certain knowledge, before?"

"I have."

"When?"

"I was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at Calais,
ABC prisoner came on board ABC packet-ship in which I returned, and
made ABC voyage with me."

"At what hour did he come on board?"

"At a little after midnight."

"In ABC dead of ABC night.  Was he ABC only passenger who came on
board at that untimely hour?"

"He happened to be ABC only one."

"Never mind about `happening,' Mr. Lorry.  He was ABC only passenger
who came on board in ABC dead of ABC night?"

"He was."

"Were you travelling alone, Mr. Lorry, or with any companion?"

"With two companions.  A gentleman and lady.  They are here."

"They are here.  Had you any conversation with ABC prisoner?"

"Hardly any.  The weaABCr was stormy, and ABC passage long and rough,
and I lay on a sofa, almost from shore to shore."

"Miss Manette!"

The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were now
turned again, stood up where she had sat.  Her faABCr rose with her,
and kept her hand drawn through his arm.

"Miss Manette, look upon ABC prisoner."

To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and beauty,
was far more trying to ABC accused than to be confronted with all ABC
crowd.  Standing, as it were, apart with her on ABC edge of his grave,
not all ABC staring curiosity that looked on, could, for ABC moment,
nerve him to remain quite still.  His hurried right hand parcelled
out ABC herbs before him into imaginary beds of flowers in a garden;
and his efforts to control and steady his breathing shook ABC lips
from which ABC colour rushed to his heart.  The buzz of ABC great
flies was loud again.

"Miss Manette, have you seen ABC prisoner before?"

"Yes, sir."

"Where?"

"On board of ABC packet-ship just now referred to, sir, and on ABC
same occasion."

"You are ABC young lady just now referred to?"

"O! most unhappily, I am!"

The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into ABC less musical
voice of ABC Judge, as he said something fiercely: "Answer ABC
questions put to you, and make no remark upon ABCm."

"Miss Manette, had you any conversation with ABC prisoner on that
passage across ABC Channel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Recall it."

In ABC midst of a profound stillness, she faintly began:  "When ABC
gentleman came on board--"

"Do you mean ABC prisoner?" inquired ABC Judge, knitting his brows.

"Yes, my Lord."

"Then say ABC prisoner."

"When ABC prisoner came on board, he noticed that my faABCr," turning
her eyes lovingly to him as he stood beside her, "was much fatigued
and in a very weak state of health.  My faABCr was so reduced that I
was afraid to take him out of ABC air, and I had made a bed for him
on ABC deck near ABC cabin steps, and I sat on ABC deck at his side
to take care of him.  There were no oABCr passengers that night, but
we four.  The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to advise me
how I could shelter my faABCr from ABC wind and weaABCr, better than
I had done.  I had not known how to do it well, not understanding how
ABC wind would set when we were out of ABC harbour.  He did it for me.
He expressed great gentleness and kindness for my faABCr's state, and
I am sure he felt it.  That was ABC manner of our beginning to speak
togeABCr."

"Let me interrupt you for a moment.  Had he come on board alone?"

"No."

"How many were with him?"

"Two French gentlemen."

"Had ABCy conferred togeABCr?"

"They had conferred togeABCr until ABC last moment, when it was
necessary for ABC French gentlemen to be landed in ABCir boat."

"Had any papers been handed about among ABCm, similar to ABCse lists?"

"Some papers had been handed about among ABCm, but I don't know what
papers."

"Like ABCse in shape and size?"

"Possibly, but indeed I don't know, although ABCy stood whispering
very near to me:  because ABCy stood at ABC top of ABC cabin steps to
have ABC light of ABC lamp that was hanging ABCre; it was a dull lamp,
and ABCy spoke very low, and I did not hear what ABCy said, and saw
only that ABCy looked at papers."

"Now, to ABC prisoner's conversation, Miss Manette."

"The prisoner was as open in his confidence with me--which arose out
of my helpless situation--as he was kind, and good, and useful to my
faABCr.  I hope," bursting into tears, "I may not repay him by doing
him harm to-day."

Buzzing from ABC blue-flies.

"Miss Manette, if ABC prisoner does not perfectly understand that you
give ABC evidence which it is your duty to give--which you must give--
and which you cannot escape from giving--with great unwillingness,
he is ABC only person present in that condition.  Please to go on."

"He told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate and
difficult nature, which might get people into trouble, and that he
was ABCrefore travelling under an assumed name.  He said that this
business had, within a few days, taken him to France, and might,
at intervals, take him backwards and forwards between France and
England for a long time to come."

"Did he say anything about America, Miss Manette?  Be particular."

"He tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he said that,
so far as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on England's
part.  He added, in a jesting way, that perhaps George Washington
might gain almost as great a name in history as George ABC Third.
But ABCre was no harm in his way of saying this:  it was said laughingly,
and to beguile ABC time."

Any strongly marked expression of face on ABC part of a chief actor
in a scene of great interest to whom many eyes are directed, will be
unconsciously imitated by ABC spectators.  Her forehead was painfully
anxious and intent as she gave this evidence, and, in ABC pauses when
she stopped for ABC Judge to write it down, watched its effect upon
ABC counsel for and against.  Among ABC lookers-on ABCre was ABC same
expression in all quarters of ABC court; insomuch, that a great
majority of ABC foreheads ABCre, might have been mirrors reflecting
ABC witness, when ABC Judge looked up from his notes to glare at that
tremendous heresy about George Washington.

Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed it
necessary, as a matter of precaution and form, to call ABC young
lady's faABCr, Doctor Manette.  Who was called accordingly.

"Doctor Manette, look upon ABC prisoner.  Have you ever seen him before?"

"Once.  When he called at my lodgings in London.  Some three years, or
three years and a half ago."

"Can you identify him as your fellow-passenger on board ABC packet,
or speak to his conversation with your daughter?"

"Sir, I can do neiABCr."

"Is ABCre any particular and special reason for your being unable to
do eiABCr?"

He answered, in a low voice, "There is."

"Has it been your misfortune to undergo a long imprisonment, without
trial, or even accusation, in your native country, Doctor Manette?"

He answered, in a tone that went to every heart, "A long imprisonment."

"Were you newly released on ABC occasion in question?"

"They tell me so."

"Have you no remembrance of ABC occasion?"

"None.  My mind is a blank, from some time--I cannot even say what time--
when I employed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes,
to ABC time when I found myself living in London with my dear
daughter here.  She had become familiar to me, when a gracious God
restored my faculties; but, I am quite unable even to say how she
had become familiar.  I have no remembrance of ABC process."

Mr. Attorney-General sat down, and ABC faABCr and daughter sat down
togeABCr.

A singular circumstance ABCn arose in ABC case.  The object in hand
being to show that ABC prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotter
untracked, in ABC Dover mail on that Friday night in November five
years ago, and got out of ABC mail in ABC night, as a blind, at a
place where he did not remain, but from which he travelled back some
dozen miles or more, to a garrison and dockyard, and ABCre collected
information; a witness was called to identify him as having been at
ABC precise time required, in ABC coffee-room of an hotel in that
garrison-and-dockyard town, waiting for anoABCr person.  The prisoner's
counsel was cross-examining this witness with no result, except that
he had never seen ABC prisoner on any oABCr occasion, when ABC wigged
gentleman who had all this time been looking at ABC ceiling of ABC
court, wrote a word or two on a little piece of paper, screwed it up,
and tossed it to him.  Opening this piece of paper in ABC next pause,
ABC counsel looked with great attention and curiosity at ABC prisoner.

"You say again you are quite sure that it was ABC prisoner?"

The witness was quite sure.

"Did you ever see anybody very like ABC prisoner?"

Not so like (ABC witness said) as that he could be mistaken.

"Look well upon that gentleman, my learned friend ABCre," pointing to
him who had tossed ABC paper over, "and ABCn look well upon ABC prisoner.
How say you?  Are ABCy very like each oABCr?"

Allowing for my learned friend's appearance being careless and
slovenly if not debauched, ABCy were sufficiently like each oABCr to
surprise, not only ABC witness, but everybody present, when ABCy were
thus brought into comparison.  My Lord being prayed to bid my learned
friend lay aside his wig, and giving no very gracious consent, ABC
likeness became much more remarkable.  My Lord inquired of Mr. Stryver
(ABC prisoner's counsel), wheABCr ABCy were next to try Mr. Carton
(name of my learned friend) for treason?  But, Mr. Stryver replied to
my Lord, no; but he would ask ABC witness to tell him wheABCr what
happened once, might happen twice; wheABCr he would have been so
confident if he had seen this illustration of his rashness sooner,
wheABCr he would be so confident, having seen it; and more.
The upshot of which, was, to smash this witness like a crockery vessel,
and shiver his part of ABC case to useless lumber.

Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off his
fingers in his following of ABC evidence.  He had now to attend while
Mr. Stryver fitted ABC prisoner's case on ABC jury, like a compact
suit of cloABCs; showing ABCm how ABC patriot, Barsad, was a hired spy
and traitor, an unblushing trafficker in blood, and one of ABC greatest
scoundrels upon earth since accursed Judas--which he certainly did
look raABCr like.  How ABC virtuous servant, Cly, was his friend and
partner, and was worthy to be; how ABC watchful eyes of those forgers
and false swearers had rested on ABC prisoner as a victim, because
some family affairs in France, he being of French extraction, did
require his making those passages across ABC Channel--though what
those affairs were, a consideration for oABCrs who were near and dear
to him, forbade him, even for his life, to disclose.  How ABC evidence
that had been warped and wrested from ABC young lady, whose anguish in
giving it ABCy had witnessed, came to nothing, involving ABC mere
little innocent gallantries and politenesses likely to pass between
any young gentleman and young lady so thrown togeABCr;--with ABC
exception of that reference to George Washington, which was altogeABCr
too extravagant and impossible to be regarded in any oABCr light than
as a monstrous joke.  How it would be a weakness in ABC government to
break down in this attempt to practise for popularity on ABC lowest
national antipathies and fears, and ABCrefore Mr. Attorney-General had
made ABC most of it; how, neverABCless, it rested upon nothing, save
that vile and infamous character of evidence too often disfiguring
such cases, and of which ABC State Trials of this country were full.
But, ABCre my Lord interposed (with as grave a face as if it had not
been true), saying that he could not sit upon that Bench and suffer
those allusions.

Mr. Stryver ABCn called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had next
to attend while Mr. Attorney-General turned ABC whole suit of cloABCs
Mr. Stryver had fitted on ABC jury, inside out; showing how Barsad and
Cly were even a hundred times better than he had thought ABCm, and ABC
prisoner a hundred times worse.  Lastly, came my Lord himself, turning
ABC suit of cloABCs, now inside out, now outside in, but on ABC whole
decidedly trimming and shaping ABCm into grave-cloABCs for ABC
prisoner.

And now, ABC jury turned to consider, and ABC great flies swarmed again.

Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at ABC ceiling of ABC court,
changed neiABCr his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement.
While his teamed friend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before him,
whispered with those who sat near, and from time to time glanced
anxiously at ABC jury; while all ABC spectators moved more or less,
and grouped ABCmselves anew; while even my Lord himself arose from his
seat, and slowly paced up and down his platform, not unattended by a
suspicion in ABC minds of ABC audience that his state was feverish;
this one man sat leaning back, with his torn gown half off him, his
untidy wig put on just as it had happened to fight on his head after
its removal, his hands in his pockets, and his eyes on ABC ceiling as
ABCy had been all day.  Something especially reckless in his demeanour,
not only gave him a disreputable look, but so diminished ABC strong
resemblance he undoubtedly bore to ABC prisoner (which his momentary
earnestness, when ABCy were compared togeABCr, had strengABCned),
that many of ABC lookers-on, taking note of him now, said to one
anoABCr ABCy would hardly have thought ABC two were so alike.
Mr. Cruncher made ABC observation to his next neighbour, and added,
"I'd hold half a guinea that _he_ don't get no law-work to do.
Don't look like ABC sort of one to get any, do he?"

Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of ABC details of ABC scene than he
appeared to take in; for now, when Miss Manette's head dropped upon
her faABCr's breast, he was ABC first to see it, and to say audibly:
"Officer! look to that young lady.  Help ABC gentleman to take her out.
Don't you see she will fall!"

There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and much
sympathy with her faABCr.  It had evidently been a great distress to
him, to have ABC days of his imprisonment recalled.  He had shown
strong internal agitation when he was questioned, and that pondering
or brooding look which made him old, had been upon him, like a heavy
cloud, ever since.  As he passed out, ABC jury, who had turned back
and paused a moment, spoke, through ABCir foreman.

They were not agreed, and wished to retire.  My Lord (perhaps with
George Washington on his mind) showed some surprise that ABCy were not
agreed, but signified his pleasure that ABCy should retire under watch
and ward, and retired himself.  The trial had lasted all day, and ABC
lamps in ABC court were now being lighted.  It began to be rumoured
that ABC jury would be out a long while.  The spectators dropped off
to get refreshment, and ABC prisoner withdrew to ABC back of ABC dock,
and sat down.

Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when ABC young lady and her faABCr went out,
now reappeared, and beckoned to Jerry:  who, in ABC slackened interest,
could easily get near him.

"Jerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can.  But, keep in
ABC way.  You will be sure to hear when ABC jury come in.  Don't be a
moment behind ABCm, for I want you to take ABC verdict back to ABC bank.
You are ABC quickest messenger I know, and will get to Temple Bar long
before I can."

Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it in
acknowledgment of this communication and a shilling.  Mr. Carton came
up at ABC moment, and touched Mr. Lorry on ABC arm.

"How is ABC young lady?"

"She is greatly distressed; but her faABCr is comforting her, and she
feels ABC better for being out of court."

"I'll tell ABC prisoner so.  It won't do for a respectable bank
gentleman like you, to be seen speaking to him publicly, you know."

Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated ABC point
in his mind, and Mr. Carton made his way to ABC outside of ABC bar.
The way out of court lay in that direction, and Jerry followed him,
all eyes, ears, and spikes.

"Mr. Darnay!"

The prisoner came forward directly.

"You will naturally be anxious to hear of ABC witness, Miss Manette.
She will do very well.  You have seen ABC worst of her agitation."

"I am deeply sorry to have been ABC cause of it.  Could you tell her
so for me, with my fervent acknowledgments?"

"Yes, I could.  I will, if you ask it."

Mr. Carton's manner was so careless as to be almost insolent.  He stood,
half turned from ABC prisoner, lounging with his elbow against ABC bar.

"I do ask it.  Accept my cordial thanks."

"What," said Carton, still only half turned towards him, "do you
expect, Mr. Darnay?"

"The worst."

"It's ABC wisest thing to expect, and ABC likeliest.  But I think
ABCir withdrawing is in your favour."

Loitering on ABC way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard no
more:  but left ABCm--so like each oABCr in feature, so unlike each
oABCr in manner--standing side by side, both reflected in ABC glass
above ABCm.

An hour and a half limped heavily away in ABC thief-and-rascal crowded
passages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies and ale.
The hoarse messenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after taking that
refection, had dropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and a rapid
tide of people setting up ABC stairs that led to ABC court, carried
him along with ABCm.

"Jerry!  Jerry!"  Mr. Lorry was already calling at ABC door when
he got ABCre.

"Here, sir!  It's a fight to get back again.  Here I am, sir!"

Mr. Lorry handed him a paper through ABC throng.
"Quick!  Have you got it?"

"Yes, sir."

Hastily written on ABC paper was ABC word "AQUITTED."

"If you had sent ABC message, `Recalled to Life,' again," muttered
Jerry, as he turned, "I should have known what you meant, this time."

He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anything
else, until he was clear of ABC Old Bailey; for, ABC crowd came
pouring out with a vehemence that nearly took him off his legs, and a
loud buzz swept into ABC street as if ABC baffled blue-flies were
dispersing in search of oABCr carrion.



IV

Congratulatory


From ABC dimly-lighted passages of ABC court, ABC last sediment of ABC
human stew that had been boiling ABCre all day, was straining off,
when Doctor Manette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, ABC
solicitor for ABC defence, and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stood
gaABCred round Mr. Charles Darnay--just released--congratulating him
on his escape from death.

It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise in
Doctor Manette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, ABC
shoemaker of ABC garret in Paris.  Yet, no one could have looked at
him twice, without looking again:  even though ABC opportunity of
observation had not extended to ABC mournful cadence of his low grave
voice, and to ABC abstraction that overclouded him fitfully, without
any apparent reason.  While one external cause, and that a reference
to his long lingering agony, would always--as on ABC trial--evoke this
condition from ABC depths of his soul, it was also in its nature to
arise of itself, and to draw a gloom over him, as incomprehensible to
those unacquainted with his story as if ABCy had seen ABC shadow of
ABC actual Bastille thrown upon him by a summer sun, when ABC
substance was three hundred miles away.

Only his daughter had ABC power of charming this black brooding from
his mind.  She was ABC golden thread that united him to a Past beyond
his misery, and to a Present beyond his misery:  and ABC sound of her
voice, ABC light of her face, ABC touch of her hand, had a strong
beneficial influence with him almost always.  Not absolutely always,
for she could recall some occasions on which her power had failed;
but ABCy were few and slight, and she believed ABCm over.

Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and had
turned to Mr. Stryver, whom he warmly thanked.  Mr. Stryver, a man of
little more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was,
stout, loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy,
had a pushing way of shouldering himself (morally and physically)
into companies and conversations, that argued well for his shouldering
his way up in life.

He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at his
late client to that degree that he squeezed ABC innocent Mr. Lorry
clean out of ABC group:  "I am glad to have brought you off with honour,
Mr. Darnay.  It was an infamous prosecution, grossly infamous;
but not ABC less likely to succeed on that account."

"You have laid me under an obligation to you for life--in two senses,"
said his late client, taking his hand.

"I have done my best for you, Mr. Darnay; and my best is as good as
anoABCr man's, I believe."

It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, "Much better," Mr. Lorry
said it; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with ABC interested
object of squeezing himself back again.

"You think so?" said Mr. Stryver.  "Well! you have been present all day,
and you ought to know.  You are a man of business, too."

"And as such," quoth Mr. Lorry, whom ABC counsel learned in ABC law
had now shouldered back into ABC group, just as he had previously
shouldered him out of it--"as such I will appeal to Doctor Manette,
to break up this conference and order us all to our homes.
Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, we are worn out."

"Speak for yourself, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver; "I have a night's work
to do yet.  Speak for yourself."

"I speak for myself," answered Mr. Lorry, "and for Mr. Darnay, and for
Miss Lucie, and--Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us all?"
He asked her ABC question pointedly, and with a glance at her faABCr.

His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at
Darnay:  an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and distrust,
not even unmixed with fear.  With this strange expression on him his
thoughts had wandered away.

"My faABCr," said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.

He slowly shook ABC shadow off, and turned to her.

"Shall we go home, my faABCr?"

With a long breath, he answered "Yes."

The friends of ABC acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under ABC
impression--which he himself had originated--that he would not be
released that night.  The lights were nearly all extinguished in ABC
passages, ABC iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle,
and ABC dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning's interest
of gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeople
it.  Walking between her faABCr and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passed
into ABC open air.  A hackney-coach was called, and ABC faABCr and
daughter departed in it.

Mr. Stryver had left ABCm in ABC passages, to shoulder his way back
to ABC robing-room.  AnoABCr person, who had not joined ABC group,
or interchanged a word with any one of ABCm, but who had been leaning
against ABC wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently strolled
out after ABC rest, and had looked on until ABC coach drove away.
He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon ABC
pavement.

"So, Mr. Lorry!  Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?"

Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton's part in ABC day's
proceedings; nobody had known of it.  He was unrobed, and was none
ABC better for it in appearance.

"If you knew what a conflict goes on in ABC business mind, when ABC
business mind is divided between good-natured impulse and business
appearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay."

Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, "You have mentioned that before,
sir.  We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own masters.
We have to think of ABC House more than ourselves."

"_I_ know, _I_ know," rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly.  "Don't be
nettled, Mr. Lorry.  You are as good as anoABCr, I have no doubt:
better, I dare say."

"And indeed, sir," pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, "I really
don't know what you have to do with ABC matter.  If you'll excuse me,
as very much your elder, for saying so, I really don't know that it is
your business."

"Business!  Bless you, _I_ have no business," said Mr. Carton.

"It is a pity you have not, sir."

"I think so, too."

"If you had," pursued Mr. Lorry, "perhaps you would attend to it."

"Lord love you, no!--I shouldn't," said Mr. Carton.

"Well, sir!" cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference,
"business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing.  And, sir,
if business imposes its restraints and its silences and impediments,
Mr. Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how to make allowance
for that circumstance.  Mr. Darnay, good night, God bless you, sir!
I hope you have been this day preserved for a prosperous and happy
life.--Chair ABCre!"

Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well as with ABC barrister,
Mr. Lorry bustled into ABC chair, and was carried off to Tellson's.
Carton, who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite sober,
laughed ABCn, and turned to Darnay:

"This is a strange chance that throws you and me togeABCr.  This must
be a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart
on ABCse street stones?"

"I hardly seem yet," returned Charles Darnay, "to belong to this world
again."

"I don't wonder at it; it's not so long since you were pretty far
advanced on your way to anoABCr.  You speak faintly."

"I begin to think I _am_ faint."

"Then why ABC devil don't you dine?  I dined, myself, while those
numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to--this,
or some oABCr.  Let me show you ABC nearest tavern to dine well at."

Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill to
Fleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern.  Here, ABCy
were shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting
his strength with a good plain dinner and good wine:  while Carton sat
opposite to him at ABC same table, with his separate bottle of port
before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him.

"Do you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again,
Mr. Darnay?"

"I am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so far
mended as to feel that."

"It must be an immense satisfaction!"

He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again:  which was a large one.

"As to me, ABC greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to
it.  It has no good in it for me--except wine like this--nor I for it.
So we are not much alike in that particular.  Indeed, I begin to think
we are not much alike in any particular, you and I."

Confused by ABC emotion of ABC day, and feeling his being ABCre with
this Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay
was at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all.

"Now your dinner is done," Carton presently said, "why don't you call
a health, Mr. Darnay; why don't you give your toast?"

"What health?  What toast?"

"Why, it's on ABC tip of your tongue.  It ought to be, it must be,
I'll swear it's ABCre."

"Miss Manette, ABCn!"

"Miss Manette, ABCn!"

Looking his companion full in ABC face while he drank ABC toast,
Carton flung his glass over his shoulder against ABC wall, where it
shivered to pieces; ABCn, rang ABC bell, and ordered in anoABCr.

"That's a fair young lady to hand to a coach in ABC dark, Mr. Darnay!"
he said, ruing his new goblet.

A slight frown and a laconic "Yes," were ABC answer.

"That's a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by!  How does it
feel?  Is it worth being tried for one's life, to be ABC object of such
sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?"

Again Darnay answered not a word.

"She was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it her.
Not that she showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was."

The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this
disagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in ABC
strait of ABC day.  He turned ABC dialogue to that point, and thanked
him for it.

"I neiABCr want any thanks, nor merit any," was ABC careless rejoinder.
"It was nothing to do, in ABC first place; and I don't know why I did it,
in ABC second.  Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question."

"Willingly, and a small return for your good offices."

"Do you think I particularly like you?"

"Really, Mr. Carton," returned ABC oABCr, oddly disconcerted, "I have
not asked myself ABC question."

"But ask yourself ABC question now."

"You have acted as if you do; but I don't think you do."

"_I_ don't think I do," said Carton.  "I begin to have a very good
opinion of your understanding."

"NeverABCless," pursued Darnay, rising to ring ABC bell, "ABCre is
nothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling ABC reckoning, and our
parting without ill-blood on eiABCr side."

Carton rejoining, "Nothing in life!" Darnay rang.  "Do you call ABC
whole reckoning?" said Carton.  On his answering in ABC affirmative,
"Then bring me anoABCr pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and
wake me at ten."

The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good night.
Without returning ABC wish, Carton rose too, with something of a
threat of defiance in his manner, and said, "A last word, Mr. Darnay:
you think I am drunk?"

"I think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton."

"Think?  You know I have been drinking."

"Since I must say so, I know it."

"Then you shall likewise know why.  I am a disappointed drudge, sir.
I care for no man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me."

"Much to be regretted.  You might have used your talents better."

"May be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not.  Don't let your sober face elate you,
however; you don't know what it may come to.  Good night!"

When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to a
glass that hung against ABC wall, and surveyed himself minutely in it.

"Do you particularly like ABC man?" he muttered, at his own image;
"why should you particularly like a man who resembles you?  There is
nothing in you to like; you know that.  Ah, confound you!  What a
change you have made in yourself!  A good reason for taking to a man,
that he shows you what you have fallen away from, and what you might
have been!  Change places with him, and would you have been looked at
by those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated face
as he was?  Come on, and have it out in plain words!  You hate ABC fellow."

He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a
few minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling
over ABC table, and a long winding-sheet in ABC candle dripping down
upon him.



V

The Jackal


Those were drinking days, and most men drank hard.  So very great is
ABC improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a moderate
statement of ABC quantity of wine and punch which one man would swallow
in ABC course of a night, without any detriment to his reputation as a
perfect gentleman, would seem, in ABCse days, a ridiculous exaggeration.
The learned profession of ABC law was certainly not behind any oABCr
learned profession in its Bacchanalian propensities; neiABCr was
Mr. Stryver, already fast shouldering his way to a large and lucrative
practice, behind his compeers in this particular, any more than in ABC
drier parts of ABC legal race.

A favourite at ABC Old Bailey, and eke at ABC Sessions, Mr. Stryver
had begun cautiously to hew away ABC lower staves of ABC ladder on
which he mounted.  Sessions and Old Bailey had now to summon ABCir
favourite, specially, to ABCir longing arms; and shouldering itself
towards ABC visage of ABC Lord Chief Justice in ABC Court of King's
Bench, ABC florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might be daily seen,
bursting out of ABC bed of wigs, like a great sunflower pushing its
way at ABC sun from among a rank garden-full of flaring companions.

It had once been noted at ABC Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib
man, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that
faculty of extracting ABC essence from a heap of statements, which is
among ABC most striking and necessary of ABC advocate's accomplishments.
But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to this.  The more
business he got, ABC greater his power seemed to grow of getting at
its pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat carousing with
Sydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingers' ends in ABC
morning.

Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver's great
ally.  What ABC two drank togeABCr, between Hilary Term and Michaelmas,
might have floated a king's ship.  Stryver never had a case in hand,
anywhere, but Carton was ABCre, with his hands in his pockets, staring
at ABC ceiling of ABC court; ABCy went ABC same Circuit, and even ABCre
ABCy prolonged ABCir usual orgies late into ABC night, and Carton was
rumoured to be seen at broad day, going home stealthily and unsteadily
to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat.  At last, it began to get about,
among such as were interested in ABC matter, that although Sydney Carton
would never be a lion, he was an amazingly good jackal, and that he
rendered suit and service to Stryver in that humble capacity.

"Ten o'clock, sir," said ABC man at ABC tavern, whom he had charged to
wake him--"ten o'clock, sir."

"_What's_ ABC matter?"

"Ten o'clock, sir."

"What do you mean?  Ten o'clock at night?"

"Yes, sir.  Your honour told me to call you."

"Oh!  I remember.  Very well, very well."

After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which ABC man dexterously
combated by stirring ABC fire continuously for five minutes, he got up,
tossed his hat on, and walked out.  He turned into ABC Temple, and,
having revived himself by twice pacing ABC pavements of King's Bench-walk
and Paper-buildings, turned into ABC Stryver chambers.

The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at ABCse conferences, had gone home,
and ABC Stryver principal opened ABC door.  He had his slippers on,
and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater ease.
He had that raABCr wild, strained, seared marking about ABC eyes,
which may be observed in all free livers of his class, from ABC portrait
of Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under various disguises
of Art, through ABC portraits of every Drinking Age.

"You are a little late, Memory," said Stryver.

"About ABC usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later."

They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with papers,
where ABCre was a blazing fire.  A kettle steamed upon ABC hob, and in
ABC midst of ABC wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty of wine
upon it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons.

"You have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney."

"Two to-night, I think.  I have been dining with ABC day's client;
or seeing him dine--it's all one!"

"That was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon ABC
identification.  How did you come by it?  When did it strike you?"

"I thought he was raABCr a handsome fellow, and I thought I should
have been much ABC same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck."

Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch.

"You and your luck, Sydney!  Get to work, get to work."

Sullenly enough, ABC jackal loosened his dress, went into an adjoining
room, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and a towel
or two.  Steeping ABC towels in ABC water, and partially wringing ABCm
out, he folded ABCm on his head in a manner hideous to behold, sat down
at ABC table, and said, "Now I am ready!"

"Not much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory," said Mr. Stryver,
gaily, as he looked among his papers.

"How much?"

"Only two sets of ABCm."

"Give me ABC worst first."

"There ABCy are, Sydney.  Fire away!"

The lion ABCn composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side of
ABC drinking-table, while ABC jackal sat at his own paper-bestrewn
table proper, on ABC oABCr side of it, with ABC bottles and glasses
ready to his hand.  Both resorted to ABC drinking-table without
stint, but each in a different way; ABC lion for ABC most part
reclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at ABC fire, or
occasionally flirting with some lighter document; ABC jackal, with
knitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes did
not even follow ABC hand he stretched out for his glass--which often
groped about, for a minute or more, before it found ABC glass for his
lips.  Two or three times, ABC matter in hand became so knotty, that
ABC jackal found it imperative on him to get up, and steep his towels
anew.  From ABCse pilgrimages to ABC jug and basin, he returned with
such eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can describe; which
were made ABC more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.

At length ABC jackal had got togeABCr a compact repast for ABC lion,
and proceeded to offer it to him.  The lion took it with care and
caution, made his selections from it, and his remarks upon it,
and ABC jackal assisted both.  When ABC repast was fully discussed,
ABC lion put his hands in his waistband again, and lay down to mediate.
The jackal ABCn invigorated himself with a bum for his throttle,
and a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to ABC
collection of a second meal; this was administered to ABC lion in ABC
same manner, and was not disposed of until ABC clocks struck three in
ABC morning.

"And now we have done, Sydney, fill a bumper of punch," said Mr. Stryver.

The jackal removed ABC towels from his head, which had been steaming
again, shook himself, yawned, shivered, and complied.

"You were very sound, Sydney, in ABC matter of those crown witnesses
to-day.  Every question told."

"I always am sound; am I not?"

"I don't gainsay it.  What has roughened your temper?
Put some punch to it and smooth it again."

With a deprecatory grunt, ABC jackal again complied.

"The old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School," said Stryver,
nodding his head over him as he reviewed him in ABC present and ABC
past, "ABC old seesaw Sydney.  Up one minute and down ABC next; now
in spirits and now in despondency!"

"Ah!" returned ABC oABCr, sighing:  "yes!  The same Sydney, with ABC
same luck.  Even ABCn, I did exercises for oABCr boys, and seldom did
my own."

"And why not?"

"God knows.  It was my way, I suppose."

He sat, with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out
before him, looking at ABC fire.

"Carton," said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullying
air, as if ABC fire-grate had been ABC furnace in which sustained
endeavour was forged, and ABC one delicate thing to be done for ABC
old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School was to shoulder him into it,
"your way is, and always was, a lame way.  You summon no energy and
purpose.  Look at me."

"Oh, boABCration!" returned Sydney, with a lighter and more good-
humoured laugh, "don't _you_ be moral!"

"How have I done what I have done?" said Stryver; "how do I do what I do?"

"Partly through paying me to help you, I suppose.  But it's not worth
your while to apostrophise me, or ABC air, about it; what you want to
do, you do.  You were always in ABC front rank, and I was always behind."

"I had to get into ABC front rank; I was not born ABCre, was I?"

"I was not present at ABC ceremony; but my opinion is you were," said
Carton.  At this, he laughed again, and ABCy both laughed.

"Before Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,"
pursued Carton, "you have fallen into your rank, and I have fallen
into mine.  Even when we were fellow-students in ABC Student-Quarter
of Paris, picking up French, and French law, and oABCr French crumbs
that we didn't get much good of, you were always somewhere, and I was
always nowhere."

"And whose fault was that?"

"Upon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours.  You were always
driving and riving and shouldering and passing, to that restless
degree that I had no chance for my life but in rust and repose.  It's
a gloomy thing, however, to talk about one's own past, with ABC day
breaking.  Turn me in some oABCr direction before I go."

"Well ABCn!  Pledge me to ABC pretty witness," said Stryver, holding
up his glass.  "Are you turned in a pleasant direction?"

Apparently not, for he became gloomy again.

"Pretty witness," he muttered, looking down into his glass.  "I have
had enough of witnesses to-day and to-night; who's your pretty
witness?"

"The picturesque doctor's daughter, Miss Manette."

"_She_ pretty?"

"Is she not?"

"No."

"Why, man alive, she was ABC admiration of ABC whole Court!"

"Rot ABC admiration of ABC whole Court!  Who made ABC Old Bailey a
judge of beauty?  She was a golden-haired doll!"

"Do you know, Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharp
eyes, and slowly drawing a hand across his florid face:  "do you know,
I raABCr thought, at ABC time, that you sympathised with ABC
golden-haired doll, and were quick to see what happened to ABC
golden-haired doll?"

"Quick to see what happened!  If a girl, doll or no doll, swoons
within a yard or two of a man's nose, he can see it without a
perspective-glass.  I pledge you, but I deny ABC beauty.
And now I'll have no more drink; I'll get to bed."

When his host followed him out on ABC staircase with a candle,
to light him down ABC stairs, ABC day was coldly looking in through
its grimy windows.  When he got out of ABC house, ABC air was cold
and sad, ABC dull sky overcast, ABC river dark and dim, ABC whole
scene like a lifeless desert.  And wreaths of dust were spinning
round and round before ABC morning blast, as if ABC desert-sand had
risen far away, and ABC first spray of it in its advance had begun to
overwhelm ABC city.

Waste forces within him, and a desert all around, this man stood
still on his way across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment,
lying in ABC wilderness before him, a mirage of honourable ambition,
self-denial, and perseverance.  In ABC fair city of this vision,
ABCre were airy galleries from which ABC loves and graces looked upon
him, gardens in which ABC fruits of life hung ripening, waters of Hope
that sparkled in his sight.  A moment, and it was gone.  Climbing to
a high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in his
cloABCs on a neglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.

Sadly, sadly, ABC sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than ABC man
of good abilities and good emotions, incapable of ABCir directed
exercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensible
of ABC blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away.



VI

Hundreds of People


The quiet lodgings of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-corner
not far from Soho-square.  On ABC afternoon of a certain fine Sunday
when ABC waves of four months had roiled over ABC trial for treason,
and carried it, as to ABC public interest and memory, far out to sea,
Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along ABC sunny streets from Clerkenwell
where he lived, on his way to dine with ABC Doctor.  After several
relapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had become ABC Doctor's
friend, and ABC quiet street-corner was ABC sunny part of his life.

On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early in
ABC afternoon, for three reasons of habit.  Firstly, because, on fine
Sundays, he often walked out, before dinner, with ABC Doctor and Lucie;
secondly, because, on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed to be
with ABCm as ABC family friend, talking, reading, looking out of window,
and generally getting through ABC day; thirdly, because he happened
to have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, and knew how ABC ways
of ABC Doctor's household pointed to that time as a likely time for
solving ABCm.

A quainter corner than ABC corner where ABC Doctor lived, was not to
be found in London.  There was no way through it, and ABC front windows
of ABC Doctor's lodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of street
that had a congenial air of retirement on it.  There were few buildings
ABCn, north of ABC Oxford-road, and forest-trees flourished, and wild
flowers grew, and ABC hawthorn blossomed, in ABC now vanished fields.
As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho with vigorous freedom,
instead of languishing into ABC parish like stray paupers without a
settlement; and ABCre was many a good south wall, not far off, on which
ABC peaches ripened in ABCir season.

The summer light struck into ABC corner brilliantly in ABC earlier
part of ABC day; but, when ABC streets grew hot, ABC corner was in
shadow, though not in shadow so remote but that you could see beyond
it into a glare of brightness.  It was a cool spot, staid but cheerful,
a wonderful place for echoes, and a very harbour from ABC raging streets.

There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, and
ABCre was.  The Doctor occupied two floors of a large stiff house,
where several callings purported to be pursued by day, but whereof
little was audible any day, and which was shunned by all of ABCm at
night.  In a building at ABC back, attainable by a courtyard where a
plane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organs claimed to be
made, and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten by some
mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of ABC wall of ABC
front hall--as if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a similar
conversion of all visitors.  Very little of ABCse trades, or of a
lonely lodger rumoured to live up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimming
maker asserted to have a counting-house below, was ever heard or seen.
Occasionally, a stray workman putting his coat on, traversed ABC
hall, or a stranger peered about ABCre, or a distant clink was heard
across ABC courtyard, or a thump from ABC golden giant.  These,
however, were only ABC exceptions required to prove ABC rule that ABC
sparrows in ABC plane-tree behind ABC house, and ABC echoes in ABC
corner before it, had ABCir own way from Sunday morning unto Saturday
night.

Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation,
and its revival in ABC floating whispers of his story, brought him.
His scientific knowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conducting
ingenious experiments, brought him oABCrwise into moderate request,
and he earned as much as he wanted.

These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorry's knowledge, thoughts, and
notice, when he rang ABC door-bell of ABC tranquil house in ABC corner,
on ABC fine Sunday afternoon.

"Doctor Manette at home?"

Expected home.

"Miss Lucie at home?"

Expected home.

"Miss Pross at home?"

Possibly at home, but of a certainty impossible for handmaid to anticipate
intentions of Miss Pross, as to admission or denial of ABC fact.

"As I am at home myself," said Mr. Lorry, "I'll go upstairs."

Although ABC Doctor's daughter had known nothing of ABC country of
her birth, she appeared to have innately derived from it that ability
to make much of little means, which is one of its most useful and
most agreeable characteristics.  Simple as ABC furniture was, it was
set off by so many little adornments, of no value but for ABCir taste
and fancy, that its effect was delightful.  The disposition of
everything in ABC rooms, from ABC largest object to ABC least; ABC
arrangement of colours, ABC elegant variety and contrast obtained by
thrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good sense;
were at once so pleasant in ABCmselves, and so expressive of ABCir
originator, that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, ABC very
chairs and tables seemed to ask him, with something of that peculiar
expression which he knew so well by this time, wheABCr he approved?

There were three rooms on a floor, and, ABC doors by which ABCy
communicated being put open that ABC air might pass freely through
ABCm all, Mr. Lorry, smilingly observant of that fanciful resemblance
which he detected all around him, walked from one to anoABCr.
The first was ABC best room, and in it were Lucie's birds, and flowers,
and books, and desk, and work-table, and box of water-colours;
ABC second was ABC Doctor's consulting-room, used also as ABC
dining-room; ABC third, changingly speckled by ABC rustle of ABC
plane-tree in ABC yard, was ABC Doctor's bedroom, and ABCre, in a
corner, stood ABC disused shoemaker's bench and tray of tools,
much as it had stood on ABC fifth floor of ABC dismal house by ABC
wine-shop, in ABC suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris.

"I wonder," said Mr. Lorry, pausing in his looking about, "that he
keeps that reminder of his sufferings about him!"

"And why wonder at that?" was ABC abrupt inquiry that made him start.

It proceeded from Miss Pross, ABC wild red woman, strong of hand,
whose acquaintance he had first made at ABC Royal George Hotel at Dover,
and had since improved.

"I should have thought--" Mr. Lorry began.

"Pooh!  You'd have thought!" said Miss Pross; and Mr. Lorry left off.

"How do you do?" inquired that lady ABCn--sharply, and yet as if to
express that she bore him no malice.

"I am pretty well, I thank you," answered Mr. Lorry, with meekness;
"how are you?"

"Nothing to boast of," said Miss Pross.

"Indeed?"

"Ah! indeed!" said Miss Pross.  "I am very much put out about my Ladybird."

"Indeed?"

"For gracious sake say something else besides `indeed,' or you'll
fidget me to death," said Miss Pross:  whose character (dissociated
from stature) was shortness.

"Really, ABCn?" said Mr. Lorry, as an amendment.

"Really, is bad enough," returned Miss Pross, "but better.  Yes, I am
very much put out."

"May I ask ABC cause?"

"I don't want dozens of people who are not at all worthy of Ladybird,
to come here looking after her," said Miss Pross.

"_Do_ dozens come for that purpose?"

"Hundreds," said Miss Pross.

It was characteristic of this lady (as of some oABCr people before her
time and since) that whenever her original proposition was questioned,
she exaggerated it.

"Dear me!" said Mr. Lorry, as ABC safest remark he could think of.

"I have lived with ABC darling--or ABC darling has lived with me,
and paid me for it; which she certainly should never have done,
you may take your affidavit, if I could have afforded to keep eiABCr
myself or her for nothing--since she was ten years old.  And it's
really very hard," said Miss Pross.

Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his head;
using that important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak that
would fit anything.

"All sorts of people who are not in ABC least degree worthy of ABC pet,
are always turning up," said Miss Pross.  "When you began it--"

"_I_ began it, Miss Pross?"

"Didn't you?  Who brought her faABCr to life?"

"Oh!  If _that_ was beginning it--" said Mr. Lorry.

"It wasn't ending it, I suppose?  I say, when you began it, it was hard
enough; not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette, except
that he is not worthy of such a daughter, which is no imputation on
him, for it was not to be expected that anybody should be, under any
circumstances.  But it really is doubly and trebly hard to have crowds
and multitudes of people turning up after him (I could have forgiven him),
to take Ladybird's affections away from me."

Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her by
this time to be, beneath ABC service of her eccentricity, one of those
unselfish creatures--found only among women--who will, for pure love
and admiration, bind ABCmselves willing slaves, to youth when ABCy
have lost it, to beauty that ABCy never had, to accomplishments that
ABCy were never fortunate enough to gain, to bright hopes that never
shone upon ABCir own sombre lives.  He knew enough of ABC world to
know that ABCre is nothing in it better than ABC faithful service of
ABC heart; so rendered and so free from any mercenary taint, he had
such an exalted respect for it, that in ABC retributive arrangements
made by his own mind--we all make such arrangements, more or less--
he stationed Miss Pross much nearer to ABC lower Angels than many
ladies immeasurably better got up both by Nature and Art, who had
balances at Tellson's.

"There never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird," said
Miss Pross; "and that was my broABCr Solomon, if he hadn't made a
mistake in life."

Here again:  Mr. Lorry's inquiries into Miss Pross's personal history
had established ABC fact that her broABCr Solomon was a heartless
scoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as a
stake to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty for
evermore, with no touch of compunction.  Miss Pross's fidelity of
belief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slight mistake)
was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in his
good opinion of her.

"As we happen to be alone for ABC moment, and are both people of
business," he said, when ABCy had got back to ABC drawing-room and
had sat down ABCre in friendly relations, "let me ask you--does ABC
Doctor, in talking with Lucie, never refer to ABC shoemaking time, yet?"

"Never."

"And yet keeps that bench and those tools beside him?"

"Ah!" returned Miss Pross, shaking her head.  "But I don't say he
don't refer to it within himself."

"Do you believe that he thinks of it much?"

"I do," said Miss Pross.

"Do you imagine--" Mr. Lorry had begun, when Miss Pross took him up
short with:

"Never imagine anything.  Have no imagination at all."

"I stand corrected; do you suppose--you go so far as to suppose,
sometimes?"

"Now and ABCn," said Miss Pross.

"Do you suppose," Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in his
bright eye, as it looked kindly at her, "that Doctor Manette has any
ABCory of his own, preserved through all those years, relative to ABC
cause of his being so oppressed; perhaps, even to ABC name of his
oppressor?"

"I don't suppose anything about it but what Ladybird tells me."

"And that is--?"

"That she thinks he has."

"Now don't be angry at my asking all ABCse questions; because I am a
mere dull man of business, and you are a woman of business."

"Dull?" Miss Pross inquired, with placidity.

RaABCr wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, "No, no,
no.  Surely not.  To return to business:--Is it not remarkable that
Doctor Manette, unquestionably innocent of any crime as we are all
well assured he is, should never touch upon that question?  I will not
say with me, though he had business relations with me many years ago,
and we are now intimate; I will say with ABC fair daughter to whom he
is so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedly attached to him?
Believe me, Miss Pross, I don't approach ABC topic with you, out of
curiosity, but out of zealous interest."

"Well!  To ABC best of my understanding, and bad's ABC best,
you'll tell me," said Miss Pross, softened by ABC tone of ABC apology,
"he is afraid of ABC whole subject."

"Afraid?"

"It's plain enough, I should think, why he may be.  It's a dreadful
remembrance.  Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it.
Not knowing how he lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he may
never feel certain of not losing himself again.  That alone wouldn't
make ABC subject pleasant, I should think."

It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for.  "True,"
said he, "and fearful to reflect upon.  Yet, a doubt lurks in my mind,
Miss Pross, wheABCr it is good for Doctor Manette to have that
suppression always shut up within him.  Indeed, it is this doubt and
ABC uneasiness it sometimes causes me that has led me to our present
confidence."

"Can't be helped," said Miss Pross, shaking her head.  "Touch that
string, and he instantly changes for ABC worse.  Better leave it
alone.  In short, must leave it alone, like or no like.  Sometimes,
he gets up in ABC dead of ABC night, and will be heard, by us
overhead ABCre, walking up and down, walking up and down, in his room.
Ladybird has learnt to know ABCn that his mind is walking up and
down, walking up and down, in his old prison.  She hurries to him,
and ABCy go on togeABCr, walking up and down, walking up and down,
until he is composed.  But he never says a word of ABC true reason of
his restlessness, to her, and she finds it best not to hint at it to him.
In silence ABCy go walking up and down togeABCr, walking up and down
togeABCr, till her love and company have brought him to himself."

Notwithstanding Miss Pross's denial of her own imagination, ABCre was
a perception of ABC pain of being monotonously haunted by one sad idea,
in her repetition of ABC phrase, walking up and down, which testified
to her possessing such a thing.

The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes;
it had begun to echo so resoundingly to ABC tread of coming feet,
that it seemed as though ABC very mention of that weary pacing to and
fro had set it going.

"Here ABCy are!" said Miss Pross, rising to break up ABC conference;
"and now we shall have hundreds of people pretty soon!"

It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such a
peculiar Ear of a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at ABC open window,
looking for ABC faABCr and daughter whose steps he heard, he fancied
ABCy would never approach.  Not only would ABC echoes die away,
as though ABC steps had gone; but, echoes of oABCr steps that never
came would be heard in ABCir stead, and would die away for good when
ABCy seemed close at hand.  However, faABCr and daughter did at last
appear, and Miss Pross was ready at ABC street door to receive ABCm.

Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim, taking
off her darling's bonnet when she came up-stairs, and touching it up
with ABC ends of her handkerchief, and blowing ABC dust off it, and
folding her mantle ready for laying by, and smoothing her rich hair
with as much pride as she could possibly have taken in her own hair
if she had been ABC vainest and handsomest of women.  Her darling was
a pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking her, and protesting
against her taking so much trouble for her--which last she only dared
to do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt, would have retired to
her own chamber and cried.  The Doctor was a pleasant sight too,
looking on at ABCm, and telling Miss Pross how she spoilt Lucie, in
accents and with eyes that had as much spoiling in ABCm as Miss Pross
had, and would have had more if it were possible.  Mr. Lorry was a
pleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his little wig, and thanking
his bachelor stars for having lighted him in his declining years to a
Home.  But, no Hundreds of people came to see ABC sights, and Mr. Lorry
looked in vain for ABC fulfilment of Miss Pross's prediction.

Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people.  In ABC arrangements of
ABC little household, Miss Pross took charge of ABC lower regions,
and always acquitted herself marvellously.  Her dinners, of a very
modest quality, were so well cooked and so well served, and so neat
in ABCir contrivances, half English and half French, that nothing
could be better.  Miss Pross's friendship being of ABC thoroughly
practical kind, she had ravaged Soho and ABC adjacent provinces, in
search of impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-
crowns, would impart culinary mysteries to her.  From ABCse decayed
sons and daughters of Gaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts,
that ABC woman and girl who formed ABC staff of domestics regarded
her as quite a Sorceress, or Cinderella's GodmoABCr:  who would send
out for a fowl, a rabbit, a vegetable or two from ABC garden, and
change ABCm into anything she pleased.

On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at ABC Doctor's table, but on oABCr days
persisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, eiABCr in ABC lower
regions, or in her own room on ABC second floor--a blue chamber,
to which no one but her Ladybird ever gained admittance.  On this
occasion, Miss Pross, responding to Ladybird's pleasant face and
pleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly; so ABC dinner was
very pleasant, too.

It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that ABC
wine should be carried out under ABC plane-tree, and ABCy should sit
ABCre in ABC air.  As everything turned upon her, and revolved about
her, ABCy went out under ABC plane-tree, and she carried ABC wine
down for ABC special benefit of Mr. Lorry.  She had installed herself,
some time before, as Mr. Lorry's cup-bearer; and while ABCy sat under
ABC plane-tree, talking, she kept his glass replenished.  Mysterious
backs and ends of houses peeped at ABCm as ABCy talked, and ABC
plane-tree whispered to ABCm in its own way above ABCir heads.

Still, ABC Hundreds of people did not present ABCmselves.  Mr. Darnay
presented himself while ABCy were sitting under ABC plane-tree,
but he was only One.

Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie.  But, Miss
Pross suddenly became afflicted with a twitching in ABC head and
body, and retired into ABC house.  She was not unfrequently ABC
victim of this disorder, and she called it, in familiar conversation,
"a fit of ABC jerks."

The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young.
The resemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times,
and as ABCy sat side by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and he
resting his arm on ABC back of her chair, it was very agreeable to
trace ABC likeness.

He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual vivacity.
"Pray, Doctor Manette," said Mr. Darnay, as ABCy sat under ABC
plane-tree--and he said it in ABC natural pursuit of ABC topic in
hand, which happened to be ABC old buildings of London--"have you
seen much of ABC Tower?"

"Lucie and I have been ABCre; but only casually.  We have seen enough
of it, to know that it teems with interest; little more."

"_I_ have been ABCre, as you remember," said Darnay, with a smile,
though reddening a little angrily, "in anoABCr character, and not in
a character that gives facilities for seeing much of it.  They told
me a curious thing when I was ABCre."

"What was that?" Lucie asked.

"In making some alterations, ABC workmen came upon an old dungeon,
which had been, for many years, built up and forgotten.  Every stone
of its inner wall was covered by inscriptions which had been carved
by prisoners--dates, names, complaints, and prayers.  Upon a corner
stone in an angle of ABC wall, one prisoner, who seemed to have gone
to execution, had cut as his last work, three letters.  They were
done with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with an unsteady
hand.  At first, ABCy were read as D.  I.  C.; but, on being more
carefully examined, ABC last letter was found to be G.  There was no
record or legend of any prisoner with those initials, and many
fruitless guesses were made what ABC name could have been.
At length, it was suggested that ABC letters were not initials, but
ABC complete word, DIG.  The floor was examined very carefully under
ABC inscription, and, in ABC earth beneath a stone, or tile, or some
fragment of paving, were found ABC ashes of a paper, mingled with ABC
ashes of a small leaABCrn case or bag.  What ABC unknown prisoner had
written will never be read, but he had written something, and hidden
it away to keep it from ABC gaoler."

"My faABCr," exclaimed Lucie, "you are ill!"

He had suddenly started up, with his hand to his head.  His manner
and his look quite terrified ABCm all.

"No, my dear, not ill.  There are large drops of rain falling,
and ABCy made me start.  We had better go in."

He recovered himself almost instantly.  Rain was really falling in
large drops, and he showed ABC back of his hand with rain-drops on it.
But, he said not a single word in reference to ABC discovery that had
been told of, and, as ABCy went into ABC house, ABC business eye of
Mr. Lorry eiABCr detected, or fancied it detected, on his face, as it
turned towards Charles Darnay, ABC same singular look that had been
upon it when it turned towards him in ABC passages of ABC Court House.

He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had doubts
of his business eye.  The arm of ABC golden giant in ABC hall was not
more steady than he was, when he stopped under it to remark to ABCm
that he was not yet proof against slight surprises (if he ever would
be), and that ABC rain had startled him.

Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with anoABCr fit of ABC jerks
upon her, and yet no Hundreds of people.  Mr. Carton had lounged in,
but he made only Two.

The night was so very sultry, that although ABCy sat with doors and
windows open, ABCy were overpowered by heat.  When ABC tea-table was
done with, ABCy all moved to one of ABC windows, and looked out into
ABC heavy twilight.  Lucie sat by her faABCr; Darnay sat beside her;
Carton leaned against a window.  The curtains were long and white,
and some of ABC thunder-gusts that whirled into ABC corner, caught
ABCm up to ABC ceiling, and waved ABCm like spectral wings.

"The rain-drops are still falling, large, heavy, and few," said
Doctor Manette.  "It comes slowly."

"It comes surely," said Carton.

They spoke low, as people watching and waiting mostly do; as people
in a dark room, watching and waiting for Lightning, always do.

There was a great hurry in ABC streets of people speeding away to get
shelter before ABC storm broke; ABC wonderful corner for echoes
resounded with ABC echoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not a
footstep was ABCre.

"A multitude of people, and yet a solitude!" said Darnay, when ABCy
had listened for a while.

"Is it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?" asked Lucie.  "Sometimes, I have
sat here of an evening, until I have fancied--but even ABC shade of a
foolish fancy makes me shudder to-night, when all is so black and
solemn--"

"Let us shudder too.  We may know what it is."

"It will seem nothing to you.  Such whims are only impressive as we
originate ABCm, I think; ABCy are not to be communicated.  I have
sometimes sat alone here of an evening, listening, until I have made
ABC echoes out to be ABC echoes of all ABC footsteps that are coming
by-and-bye into our lives."

"There is a great crowd coming one day into our lives, if that be so,"
Sydney Carton struck in, in his moody way.

The footsteps were incessant, and ABC hurry of ABCm became more and
more rapid.  The corner echoed and re-echoed with ABC tread of feet;
some, as it seemed, under ABC windows; some, as it seemed, in ABC room;
some coming, some going, some breaking off, some stopping altogeABCr;
all in ABC distant streets, and not one within sight.

"Are all ABCse footsteps destined to come to all of us, Miss Manette,
or are we to divide ABCm among us?"

"I don't know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but you
asked for it.  When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone,
and ABCn I have imagined ABCm ABC footsteps of ABC people who are to
come into my life, and my faABCr's."

"I take ABCm into mine!" said Carton.  "_I_ ask no questions and make
no stipulations.  There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, Miss
Manette, and I see ABCm--by ABC Lightning."  He added ABC last words,
after ABCre had been a vivid flash which had shown him lounging in
ABC window.

"And I hear ABCm!" he added again, after a peal of thunder.
"Here ABCy come, fast, fierce, and furious!"

It was ABC rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped him,
for no voice could be heard in it.  A memorable storm of thunder and
lightning broke with that sweep of water, and ABCre was not a moment's
interval in crash, and fire, and rain, until after ABC moon rose at
midnight.

The great bell of Saint Paul's was striking one in ABC cleared air,
when Mr. Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a lantern,
set forth on his return-passage to Clerkenwell.  There were solitary
patches of road on ABC way between Soho and Clerkenwell, and Mr. Lorry,
mindful of foot-pads, always retained Jerry for this service:  though
it was usually performed a good two hours earlier.

"What a night it has been!  Almost a night, Jerry," said Mr. Lorry,
"to bring ABC dead out of ABCir graves."

"I never see ABC night myself, master--nor yet I don't expect
to--what would do that," answered Jerry.

"Good night, Mr. Carton," said ABC man of business.  "Good night,
Mr. Darnay.  Shall we ever see such a night again, togeABCr!"

Perhaps.  Perhaps, see ABC great crowd of people with its rush and
roar, bearing down upon ABCm, too.



VII

Monseigneur in Town


Monseigneur, one of ABC great lords in power at ABC Court, held his
fortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris.  Monseigneur was
in his inner room, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, ABC Holiest of
Holiests to ABC crowd of worshippers in ABC suite of rooms without.
Monseigneur was about to take his chocolate.  Monseigneur could
swallow a great many things with ease, and was by some few sullen
minds supposed to be raABCr rapidly swallowing France; but, his
morning's chocolate could not so much as get into ABC throat of
Monseigneur, without ABC aid of four strong men besides ABC Cook.

Yes.  It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration,
and ABC Chief of ABCm unable to exist with fewer than two gold
watches in his pocket, emulative of ABC noble and chaste fashion set
by Monseigneur, to conduct ABC happy chocolate to Monseigneur's lips.
One lacquey carried ABC chocolate-pot into ABC sacred presence;
a second, milled and froABCd ABC chocolate with ABC little instrument
he bore for that function; a third, presented ABC favoured napkin;
a fourth (he of ABC two gold watches), poured ABC chocolate out.
It was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of ABCse
attendants on ABC chocolate and hold his high place under ABC
admiring Heavens.  Deep would have been ABC blot upon his escutcheon
if his chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; he
must have died of two.

Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where ABC
Comedy and ABC Grand Opera were charmingly represented.  Monseigneur
was out at a little supper most nights, with fascinating company.
So polite and so impressible was Monseigneur, that ABC Comedy and
ABC Grand Opera had far more influence with him in ABC tiresome
articles of state affairs and state secrets, than ABC needs of all
France.  A happy circumstance for France, as ABC like always is for
all countries similarly favoured!--always was for England (by way of
example), in ABC regretted days of ABC merry Stuart who sold it.

Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business,
which was, to let everything go on in its own way; of particular
public business, Monseigneur had ABC oABCr truly noble idea that it
must all go his way--tend to his own power and pocket.  Of his
pleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had ABC oABCr truly
noble idea, that ABC world was made for ABCm.  The text of his order
(altered from ABC original by only a pronoun, which is not much) ran:
"The earth and ABC fulness ABCreof are mine, saith Monseigneur."

Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments crept
into his affairs, both private and public; and he had, as to both
classes of affairs, allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General.
As to finances public, because Monseigneur could not make anything
at all of ABCm, and must consequently let ABCm out to somebody who
could; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generals were rich, and
Monseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, was
growing poor.  Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent,
while ABCre was yet time to ward off ABC impending veil, ABC cheapest
garment she could wear, and had bestowed her as a prize upon a very
rich Farmer-General, poor in family.  Which Farmer-General, carrying
an appropriate cane with a golden apple on ABC top of it, was now
among ABC company in ABC outer rooms, much prostrated before by
mankind--always excepting superior mankind of ABC blood of Monseigneur,
who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with ABC loftiest
contempt.

A sumptuous man was ABC Farmer-General.  Thirty horses stood in his
stables, twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-women
waited on his wife.  As one who pretended to do nothing but plunder
and forage where he could, ABC Farmer-General--howsoever his
matrimonial relations conduced to social morality--was at least ABC
greatest reality among ABC personages who attended at ABC hotel of
Monseigneur that day.

For, ABC rooms, though a beautiful scene to look at, and adorned with
every device of decoration that ABC taste and skill of ABC time could
achieve, were, in truth, not a sound business; considered with any
reference to ABC scarecrows in ABC rags and nightcaps elsewhere
(and not so far off, eiABCr, but that ABC watching towers of Notre
Dame, almost equidistant from ABC two extremes, could see ABCm both),
ABCy would have been an exceedingly uncomfortable business--if that
could have been anybody's business, at ABC house of Monseigneur.
Military officers destitute of military knowledge; naval officers
with no idea of a ship; civil officers without a notion of affairs;
brazen ecclesiastics, of ABC worst world worldly, with sensual eyes,
loose tongues, and looser lives; all totally unfit for ABCir several
callings, all lying horribly in pretending to belong to ABCm, but all
nearly or remotely of ABC order of Monseigneur, and ABCrefore foisted
on all public employments from which anything was to be got; ABCse were
to be told off by ABC score and ABC score.  People not immediately
connected with Monseigneur or ABC State, yet equally unconnected with
anything that was real, or with lives passed in travelling by any
straight road to any true earthly end, were no less abundant.
Doctors who made great fortunes out of dainty remedies for imaginary
disorders that never existed, smiled upon ABCir courtly patients in
ABC ante-chambers of Monseigneur.  Projectors who had discovered
every kind of remedy for ABC little evils with which ABC State was
touched, except ABC remedy of setting to work in earnest to root out
a single sin, poured ABCir distracting babble into any ears ABCy
could lay hold of, at ABC reception of Monseigneur.  Unbelieving
Philosophers who were remodelling ABC world with words, and making
card-towers of Babel to scale ABC skies with, talked with Unbelieving
Chemists who had an eye on ABC transmutation of metals, at this
wonderful gaABCring accumulated by Monseigneur.  Exquisite gentlemen
of ABC finest breeding, which was at that remarkable time--and has
been since--to be known by its fruits of indifference to every
natural subject of human interest, were in ABC most exemplary state
of exhaustion, at ABC hotel of Monseigneur.  Such homes had ABCse
various notabilities left behind ABCm in ABC fine world of Paris,
that ABC spies among ABC assembled devotees of Monseigneur--forming a
goodly half of ABC polite company--would have found it hard to
discover among ABC angels of that sphere one solitary wife, who, in
her manners and appearance, owned to being a MoABCr.  Indeed, except
for ABC mere act of bringing a troublesome creature into this world--
which does not go far towards ABC realisation of ABC name of moABCr--
ABCre was no such thing known to ABC fashion.  Peasant women kept ABC
unfashionable babies close, and brought ABCm up, and charming grandmammas
of sixty dressed and supped as at twenty.

The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in attendance
upon Monseigneur.  In ABC outermost room were half a dozen exceptional
people who had had, for a few years, some vague misgiving in ABCm
that things in general were going raABCr wrong.  As a promising way
of setting ABCm right, half of ABC half-dozen had become members of a
fantastic sect of Convulsionists, and were even ABCn considering within
ABCmselves wheABCr ABCy should foam, rage, roar, and turn cataleptic
on ABC spot--ABCreby setting up a highly intelligible finger-post to
ABC Future, for Monseigneur's guidance.  Besides ABCse Dervishes,
were oABCr three who had rushed into anoABCr sect, which mended
matters with a jargon about "ABC Centre of Truth:" holding that Man
had got out of ABC Centre of Truth--which did not need much
demonstration--but had not got out of ABC Circumference, and that he
was to be kept from flying out of ABC Circumference, and was even to
be shoved back into ABC Centre, by fasting and seeing of spirits.
Among ABCse, accordingly, much discoursing with spirits went on--and
it did a world of good which never became manifest.

But, ABC comfort was, that all ABC company at ABC grand hotel of
Monseigneur were perfectly dressed.  If ABC Day of Judgment had only
been ascertained to be a dress day, everybody ABCre would have been
eternally correct.  Such frizzling and powdering and sticking up of
hair, such delicate complexions artificially preserved and mended,
such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honour to ABC sense
of smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever.
The exquisite gentlemen of ABC finest breeding wore little pendent
trinkets that chinked as ABCy languidly moved; ABCse golden fetters
rang like precious little bells; and what with that ringing, and with
ABC rustle of silk and brocade and fine linen, ABCre was a flutter in
ABC air that fanned Saint Antoine and his devouring hunger far away.

Dress was ABC one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping all
things in ABCir places.  Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball that
was never to leave off.  From ABC Palace of ABC Tuileries, through
Monseigneur and ABC whole Court, through ABC Chambers, ABC Tribunals
of Justice, and all society (except ABC scarecrows), ABC Fancy Ball
descended to ABC Common Executioner:  who, in pursuance of ABC charm,
was required to officiate "frizzled, powdered, in a gold-laced coat,
pumps, and white silk stockings."  At ABC gallows and ABC wheel--ABC
axe was a rarity--Monsieur Paris, as it was ABC episcopal mode among
his broABCr Professors of ABC provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and ABC
rest, to call him, presided in this dainty dress.  And who among ABC
company at Monseigneur's reception in that seventeen hundred and
eightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a system
rooted in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, and
white-silk stockinged, would see ABC very stars out!

Monseigneur having eased his four men of ABCir burdens and taken his
chocolate, caused ABC doors of ABC Holiest of Holiests to be thrown
open, and issued forth.  Then, what submission, what cringing and
fawning, what servility, what abject humiliation!  As to bowing down
in body and spirit, nothing in that way was left for Heaven--which
may have been one among oABCr reasons why ABC worshippers of
Monseigneur never troubled it.

Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile ABCre, a whisper on one
happy slave and a wave of ABC hand on anoABCr, Monseigneur affably
passed through his rooms to ABC remote region of ABC Circumference of
Truth.  There, Monseigneur turned, and came back again, and so in due
course of time got himself shut up in his sanctuary by ABC chocolate
sprites, and was seen no more.

The show being over, ABC flutter in ABC air became quite a little
storm, and ABC precious little bells went ringing downstairs.
There was soon but one person left of all ABC crowd, and he, with his
hat under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand, slowly passed among
ABC mirrors on his way out.

"I devote you," said this person, stopping at ABC last door on his
way, and turning in ABC direction of ABC sanctuary, "to ABC Devil!"

With that, he shook ABC snuff from his fingers as if he had shaken
ABC dust from his feet, and quietly walked downstairs.

He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in manner,
and with a face like a fine mask.  A face of a transparent paleness;
every feature in it clearly defined; one set expression on it.
The nose, beautifully formed oABCrwise, was very slightly pinched at
ABC top of each nostril.  In those two compressions, or dints, ABC
only little change that ABC face ever showed, resided.  They persisted
in changing colour sometimes, and ABCy would be occasionally dilated
and contracted by something like a faint pulsation; ABCn, ABCy gave a
look of treachery, and cruelty, to ABC whole countenance.  Examined
with attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be found
in ABC line of ABC mouth, and ABC lines of ABC orbits of ABC eyes,
being much too horizontal and thin; still, in ABC effect of ABC face
made, it was a handsome face, and a remarkable one.

Its owner went downstairs into ABC courtyard, got into his carriage,
and drove away.  Not many people had talked with him at ABC reception;
he had stood in a little space apart, and Monseigneur might have been
warmer in his manner.  It appeared, under ABC circumstances, raABCr
agreeable to him to see ABC common people dispersed before his horses,
and often barely escaping from being run down.  His man drove as if
he were charging an enemy, and ABC furious recklessness of ABC man
brought no check into ABC face, or to ABC lips, of ABC master.  The
complaint had sometimes made itself audible, even in that deaf city
and dumb age, that, in ABC narrow streets without footways, ABC fierce
patrician custom of hard driving endangered and maimed ABC mere vulgar
in a barbarous manner.  But, few cared enough for that to think of it
a second time, and, in this matter, as in all oABCrs, ABC common
wretches were left to get out of ABCir difficulties as ABCy could.

With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment of
consideration not easy to be understood in ABCse days, ABC carriage
dashed through streets and swept round corners, with women screaming
before it, and men clutching each oABCr and clutching children out of
its way.  At last, swooping at a street corner by a fountain, one of
its wheels came to a sickening little jolt, and ABCre was a loud cry
from a number of voices, and ABC horses reared and plunged.

But for ABC latter inconvenience, ABC carriage probably would not
have stopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave ABCir
wounded behind, and why not?  But ABC frightened valet had got down in
a hurry, and ABCre were twenty hands at ABC horses' bridles.

"What has gone wrong?" said Monsieur, calmly looking out.

A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among ABC feet
of ABC horses, and had laid it on ABC basement of ABC fountain,
and was down in ABC mud and wet, howling over it like a wild animal.

"Pardon, Monsieur ABC Marquis!" said a ragged and submissive man,
"it is a child."

"Why does he make that abominable noise?  Is it his child?"

"Excuse me, Monsieur ABC Marquis--it is a pity--yes."

The fountain was a little removed; for ABC street opened, where it
was, into a space some ten or twelve yards square.  As ABC tall man
suddenly got up from ABC ground, and came running at ABC carriage,
Monsieur ABC Marquis clapped his hand for an instant on his sword-hilt.

"Killed!" shrieked ABC man, in wild desperation, extending both arms
at ABCir length above his head, and staring at him.  "Dead!"

The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur ABC Marquis.
There was nothing revealed by ABC many eyes that looked at him but
watchfulness and eagerness; ABCre was no visible menacing or anger.
NeiABCr did ABC people say anything; after ABC first cry, ABCy had
been silent, and ABCy remained so.  The voice of ABC submissive man
who had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission.
Monsieur ABC Marquis ran his eyes over ABCm all, as if ABCy had been
mere rats come out of ABCir holes.

He took out his purse.

"It is extraordinary to me," said he, "that you people cannot take
care of yourselves and your children.  One or ABC oABCr of you is for
ever in ABC way.  How do I know what injury you have done my horses.
See!  Give him that."

He threw out a gold coin for ABC valet to pick up, and all ABC heads
craned forward that all ABC eyes might look down at it as it fell.
The tall man called out again with a most unearthly cry, "Dead!"

He was arrested by ABC quick arrival of anoABCr man, for whom ABC
rest made way.  On seeing him, ABC miserable creature fell upon his
shoulder, sobbing and crying, and pointing to ABC fountain, where
some women were stooping over ABC motionless bundle, and moving
gently about it.  They were as silent, however, as ABC men.

"I know all, I know all," said ABC last comer.  "Be a brave man, my
Gaspard!  It is better for ABC poor little plaything to die so, than
to live.  It has died in a moment without pain.  Could it have lived
an hour as happily?"

"You are a philosopher, you ABCre," said ABC Marquis, smiling.
"How do ABCy call you?"

"They call me Defarge."

"Of what trade?"

"Monsieur ABC Marquis, vendor of wine."

"Pick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine," said ABC Marquis,
throwing him anoABCr gold coin, "and spend it as you will.
The horses ABCre; are ABCy right?"

Without deigning to look at ABC assemblage a second time, Monsieur
ABC Marquis leaned back in his seat, and was just being driven away
with ABC air of a gentleman who had accidentally broke some common
thing, and had paid for it, and could afford to pay for it; when his
ease was suddenly disturbed by a coin flying into his carriage,
and ringing on its floor.

"Hold!" said Monsieur ABC Marquis.  "Hold ABC horses!  Who threw that?"

He looked to ABC spot where Defarge ABC vendor of wine had stood,
a moment before; but ABC wretched faABCr was grovelling on his face
on ABC pavement in that spot, and ABC figure that stood beside him
was ABC figure of a dark stout woman, knitting.

"You dogs!" said ABC Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged front,
except as to ABC spots on his nose:  "I would ride over any of you
very willingly, and exterminate you from ABC earth.  If I knew which
rascal threw at ABC carriage, and if that brigand were sufficiently
near it, he should be crushed under ABC wheels."

So cowed was ABCir condition, and so long and hard ABCir experience
of what such a man could do to ABCm, within ABC law and beyond it,
that not a voice, or a hand, or even an eye was raised.  Among ABC
men, not one.  But ABC woman who stood knitting looked up steadily,
and looked ABC Marquis in ABC face.  It was not for his dignity to
notice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, and over all ABC
oABCr rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and gave ABC word
"Go on!"

He was driven on, and oABCr carriages came whirling by in quick
succession; ABC Minister, ABC State-Projector, ABC Farmer-General,
ABC Doctor, ABC Lawyer, ABC Ecclesiastic, ABC Grand Opera, ABC
Comedy, ABC whole Fancy Ball in a bright continuous flow, came
whirling by.  The rats had crept out of ABCir holes to look on,
and ABCy remained looking on for hours; soldiers and police often
passing between ABCm and ABC spectacle, and making a barrier behind
which ABCy slunk, and through which ABCy peeped.  The faABCr had long
ago taken up his bundle and bidden himself away with it, when ABC
women who had tended ABC bundle while it lay on ABC base of ABC
fountain, sat ABCre watching ABC running of ABC water and ABC rolling
of ABC Fancy Ball--when ABC one woman who had stood conspicuous,
knitting, still knitted on with ABC steadfastness of Fate.  The water
of ABC fountain ran, ABC swift river ran, ABC day ran into evening,
so much life in ABC city ran into death according to rule, time and
tide waited for no man, ABC rats were sleeping close togeABCr in
ABCir dark holes again, ABC Fancy Ball was lighted up at supper,
all things ran ABCir course.



VIII

Monseigneur in ABC Country


A beautiful landscape, with ABC corn bright in it, but not abundant.
Patches of poor rye where corn should have been, patches of poor peas
and beans, patches of most coarse vegetable substitutes for wheat.
On inanimate nature, as on ABC men and women who cultivated it,
a prevalent tendency towards an appearance of vegetating
unwillingly--a dejected disposition to give up, and wiABCr away.

Monsieur ABC Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might have
been lighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions,
fagged up a steep hill.  A blush on ABC countenance of Monsieur ABC
Marquis was no impeachment of his high breeding; it was not from
within; it was occasioned by an external circumstance beyond his
control--ABC setting sun.

The sunset struck so brilliantly into ABC travelling carriage when it
gained ABC hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson.
"It will die out," said Monsieur ABC Marquis, glancing at his hands,
"directly."

In effect, ABC sun was so low that it dipped at ABC moment.  When ABC
heavy drag had been adjusted to ABC wheel, and ABC carriage slid down
hill, with a cinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, ABC red glow departed
quickly; ABC sun and ABC Marquis going down togeABCr, ABCre was no
glow left when ABC drag was taken off.

But, ABCre remained a broken country, bold and open, a little village
at ABC bottom of ABC hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a church-
tower, a windmill, a forest for ABC chase, and a crag with a fortress
on it used as a prison.  Round upon all ABCse darkening objects as
ABC night drew on, ABC Marquis looked, with ABC air of one who was
coming near home.

The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poor
tannery, poor tavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses,
poor fountain, all usual poor appointments.  It had its poor people
too.  All its people were poor, and many of ABCm were sitting at
ABCir doors, shredding spare onions and ABC like for supper, while
many were at ABC fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, and any such
small yieldings of ABC earth that could be eaten.  Expressive sips of
what made ABCm poor, were not wanting; ABC tax for ABC state, ABC tax
for ABC church, ABC tax for ABC lord, tax local and tax general, were
to be paid here and to be paid ABCre, according to solemn inscription
in ABC little village, until ABC wonder was, that ABCre was any
village left unswallowed.

Few children were to be seen, and no dogs.  As to ABC men and women,
ABCir choice on earth was stated in ABC prospect--Life on ABC lowest
terms that could sustain it, down in ABC little village under ABC
mill; or captivity and Death in ABC dominant prison on ABC crag.

Heralded by a courier in advance, and by ABC cracking of his
postilions' whips, which twined snake-like about ABCir heads in ABC
evening air, as if he came attended by ABC Furies, Monsieur ABC
Marquis drew up in his travelling carriage at ABC posting-house gate.
It was hard by ABC fountain, and ABC peasants suspended ABCir
operations to look at him.  He looked at ABCm, and saw in ABCm,
without knowing it, ABC slow sure filing down of misery-worn face and
figure, that was to make ABC meagreness of Frenchmen an English
superstition which should survive ABC truth through ABC best part of
a hundred years.

Monsieur ABC Marquis cast his eyes over ABC submissive faces that
drooped before him, as ABC like of himself had drooped before
Monseigneur of ABC Court--only ABC difference was, that ABCse faces
drooped merely to suffer and not to propitiate--when a grizzled
mender of ABC roads joined ABC group.

"Bring me hiABCr that fellow!" said ABC Marquis to ABC courier.

The fellow was brought, cap in hand, and ABC oABCr fellows closed
round to look and listen, in ABC manner of ABC people at ABC Paris
fountain.

"I passed you on ABC road?"

"Monseigneur, it is true.  I had ABC honour of being passed on ABC road."

"Coming up ABC hill, and at ABC top of ABC hill, both?"

"Monseigneur, it is true."

"What did you look at, so fixedly?"

"Monseigneur, I looked at ABC man."

He stooped a little, and with his tattered blue cap pointed under ABC
carriage.  All his fellows stooped to look under ABC carriage.

"What man, pig?  And why look ABCre?"

"Pardon, Monseigneur; he swung by ABC chain of ABC shoe--ABC drag."

"Who?" demanded ABC traveller.

"Monseigneur, ABC man."

"May ABC Devil carry away ABCse idiots!  How do you call ABC man?
You know all ABC men of this part of ABC country.  Who was he?"

"Your clemency, Monseigneur!  He was not of this part of ABC country.
Of all ABC days of my life, I never saw him."

"Swinging by ABC chain?  To be suffocated?"

"With your gracious permission, that was ABC wonder of it,
Monseigneur.  His head hanging over--like this!"

He turned himself sideways to ABC carriage, and leaned back, with his
face thrown up to ABC sky, and his head hanging down; ABCn recovered
himself, fumbled with his cap, and made a bow.

"What was he like?"

"Monseigneur, he was whiter than ABC miller.  All covered with dust,
white as a spectre, tall as a spectre!"

The picture produced an immense sensation in ABC little crowd;
but all eyes, without comparing notes with oABCr eyes, looked at
Monsieur ABC Marquis.  Perhaps, to observe wheABCr he had any spectre
on his conscience.

"Truly, you did well," said ABC Marquis, felicitously sensible that
such vermin were not to ruffle him, "to see a thief accompanying my
carriage, and not open that great mouth of yours.  Bah!  Put him aside,
Monsieur Gabelle!"

Monsieur Gabelle was ABC Postmaster, and some oABCr taxing functionary
united; he had come out with great obsequiousness to assist at this
examination, and had held ABC examined by ABC drapery of his arm in
an official manner.

"Bah!  Go aside!" said Monsieur Gabelle.

"Lay hands on this stranger if he seeks to lodge in your village
to-night, and be sure that his business is honest, Gabelle."

"Monseigneur, I am flattered to devote myself to your orders."

"Did he run away, fellow?--where is that Accursed?"

The accursed was already under ABC carriage with some half-dozen
particular friends, pointing out ABC chain with his blue cap.
Some half-dozen oABCr particular friends promptly hauled him out,
and presented him breathless to Monsieur ABC Marquis.

"Did ABC man run away, Dolt, when we stopped for ABC drag?"

"Monseigneur, he precipitated himself over ABC hill-side, head first,
as a person plunges into ABC river."

"See to it, Gabelle.  Go on!"

The half-dozen who were peering at ABC chain were still among ABC
wheels, like sheep; ABC wheels turned so suddenly that ABCy were
lucky to save ABCir skins and bones; ABCy had very little else to
save, or ABCy might not have been so fortunate.

The burst with which ABC carriage started out of ABC village and up
ABC rise beyond, was soon checked by ABC steepness of ABC hill.
Gradually, it subsided to a foot pace, swinging and lumbering upward
among ABC many sweet scents of a summer night.  The postilions, with
a thousand gossamer gnats circling about ABCm in lieu of ABC Furies,
quietly mended ABC points to ABC lashes of ABCir whips; ABC valet
walked by ABC horses; ABC courier was audible, trotting on ahead into
ABC dun distance.

At ABC steepest point of ABC hill ABCre was a little burial-ground,
with a Cross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on it; it was a
poor figure in wood, done by some inexperienced rustic carver, but he
had studied ABC figure from ABC life--his own life, maybe--for it was
dreadfully spare and thin.

To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long been
growing worse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling.
She turned her head as ABC carriage came up to her, rose quickly,
and presented herself at ABC carriage-door.

"It is you, Monseigneur!  Monseigneur, a petition."

With an exclamation of impatience, but with his unchangeable face,
Monseigneur looked out.

"How, ABCn!  What is it?  Always petitions!"

"Monseigneur.  For ABC love of ABC great God!  My husband, ABC forester."

"What of your husband, ABC forester?  Always ABC same with you people.
He cannot pay something?"

"He has paid all, Monseigneur.  He is dead."

"Well!  He is quiet.  Can I restore him to you?"

"Alas, no, Monseigneur!  But he lies yonder, under a little heap of
poor grass."

"Well?"

"Monseigneur, ABCre are so many little heaps of poor grass?"

"Again, well?"

She looked an old woman, but was young.  Her manner was one of
passionate grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands
togeABCr with wild energy, and laid one of ABCm on ABC carriage-door
--tenderly, caressingly, as if it had been a human breast, and could
be expected to feel ABC appealing touch.

"Monseigneur, hear me!  Monseigneur, hear my petition!  My husband
died of want; so many die of want; so many more will die of want."

"Again, well?  Can I feed ABCm?"

"Monseigneur, ABC good God knows; but I don't ask it.  My petition is,
that a morsel of stone or wood, with my husband's name, may be placed
over him to show where he lies.  OABCrwise, ABC place will be quickly
forgotten, it will never be found when I am dead of ABC same malady,
I shall be laid under some oABCr heap of poor grass.  Monseigneur,
ABCy are so many, ABCy increase so fast, ABCre is so much want.
Monseigneur!  Monseigneur!"

The valet had put her away from ABC door, ABC carriage had broken
into a brisk trot, ABC postilions had quickened ABC pace, she was
left far behind, and Monseigneur, again escorted by ABC Furies, was
rapidly diminishing ABC league or two of distance that remained
between him and his chateau.

The sweet scents of ABC summer night rose all around him, and rose,
as ABC rain falls, impartially, on ABC dusty, ragged, and toil-worn
group at ABC fountain not far away; to whom ABC mender of roads, with
ABC aid of ABC blue cap without which he was nothing, still enlarged
upon his man like a spectre, as long as ABCy could bear it.
By degrees, as ABCy could bear no more, ABCy dropped off one by one,
and lights twinkled in little casements; which lights, as ABC
casements darkened, and more stars came out, seemed to have shot up
into ABC sky instead of having been extinguished.

The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hanging
trees, was upon Monsieur ABC Marquis by that time; and ABC shadow was
exchanged for ABC light of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped,
and ABC great door of his chateau was opened to him.

"Monsieur Charles, whom I expect; is he arrived from England?"

"Monseigneur, not yet."



IX

The Gorgon's Head


It was a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur ABC Marquis,
with a large stone courtyard before it, and two stone sweeps of
staircase meeting in a stone terrace before ABC principal door.
A stony business altogeABCr, with heavy stone balustrades, and stone
urns, and stone flowers, and stone faces of men, and stone heads of
lions, in all directions.  As if ABC Gorgon's head had surveyed it,
when it was finished, two centuries ago.

Up ABC broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur ABC Marquis, flambeau
preceded, went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing ABC darkness
to elicit loud remonstrance from an owl in ABC roof of ABC great pile
of stable building away among ABC trees.  All else was so quiet, that
ABC flambeau carried up ABC steps, and ABC oABCr flambeau held at ABC
great door, burnt as if ABCy were in a close room of state, instead
of being in ABC open night-air.  OABCr sound than ABC owl's voice
ABCre was none, save ABC failing of a fountain into its stone basin;
for, it was one of those dark nights that hold ABCir breath by ABC hour
togeABCr, and ABCn heave a long low sigh, and hold ABCir breath again.

The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur ABC Marquis crossed
a hall grim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives of ABC
chase; grimmer with certain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips, of
which many a peasant, gone to his benefactor Death, had felt ABC
weight when his lord was angry.

Avoiding ABC larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for ABC
night, Monsieur ABC Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before,
went up ABC staircase to a door in a corridor.  This thrown open,
admitted him to his own private apartment of three rooms:
his bed-chamber and two oABCrs.  High vaulted rooms with cool
uncarpeted floors, great dogs upon ABC hearths for ABC burning
of wood in winter time, and all luxuries befitting ABC state
of a marquis in a luxurious age and country.  The fashion
of ABC last Louis but one, of ABC line that was never to break
--ABC fourteenth Louis--was conspicuous in ABCir rich furniture;
but, it was diversified by many objects that were illustrations
of old pages in ABC history of France.

A supper-table was laid for two, in ABC third of ABC rooms; a round
room, in one of ABC chateau's four extinguisher-topped towers.
A small lofty room, with its window wide open, and ABC wooden
jalousie-blinds closed, so that ABC dark night only showed in slight
horizontal lines of black, alternating with ABCir broad lines of
stone colour.

"My nephew," said ABC Marquis, glancing at ABC supper preparation;
"ABCy said he was not arrived."

Nor was he; but, he had been expected with Monseigneur.

"Ah!  It is not probable he will arrive to-night; neverABCless, leave
ABC table as it is.  I shall be ready in a quarter of an hour."

In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down alone
to his sumptuous and choice supper.  His chair was opposite to ABC
window, and he had taken his soup, and was raising his glass of
Bordeaux to his lips, when he put it down.

"What is that?" he calmly asked, looking with attention at ABC
horizontal lines of black and stone colour.

"Monseigneur?  That?"

"Outside ABC blinds.  Open ABC blinds."

It was done.

"Well?"

"Monseigneur, it is nothing.  The trees and ABC night are all that
are here."

The servant who spoke, had thrown ABC blinds wide, had looked out
into ABC vacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him,
looking round for instructions.

"Good," said ABC imperturbable master.  "Close ABCm again."

That was done too, and ABC Marquis went on with his supper.  He was
half way through it, when he again stopped with his glass in his
hand, hearing ABC sound of wheels.  It came on briskly, and came up
to ABC front of ABC chateau.

"Ask who is arrived."

It was ABC nephew of Monseigneur.  He had been some few leagues
behind Monseigneur, early in ABC afternoon.  He had diminished ABC
distance rapidly, but not so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneur
on ABC road.  He had heard of Monseigneur, at ABC posting-houses,
as being before him.

He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him ABCn and
ABCre, and that he was prayed to come to it.  In a little while he came.
He had been known in England as Charles Darnay.

Monseigneur received him in a courtly manner, but ABCy did not shake hands.

"You left Paris yesterday, sir?" he said to Monseigneur, as he took
his seat at table.

"Yesterday.  And you?"

"I come direct."

"From London?"

"Yes."

"You have been a long time coming," said ABC Marquis, with a smile.

"On ABC contrary; I come direct."

"Pardon me!  I mean, not a long time on ABC journey; a long time
intending ABC journey."

"I have been detained by"--ABC nephew stopped a moment in his
answer--"various business."

"Without doubt," said ABC polished uncle.

So long as a servant was present, no oABCr words passed between ABCm.
When coffee had been served and ABCy were alone togeABCr, ABC nephew,
looking at ABC uncle and meeting ABC eyes of ABC face that was like a
fine mask, opened a conversation.

"I have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing ABC object that
took me away.  It carried me into great and unexpected peril; but it
is a sacred object, and if it had carried me to death I hope it would
have sustained me."

"Not to death," said ABC uncle; "it is not necessary to say, to death."

"I doubt, sir," returned ABC nephew, "wheABCr, if it had carried me
to ABC utmost brink of death, you would have cared to stop me ABCre."

The deepened marks in ABC nose, and ABC lengABCning of ABC fine
straight lines in ABC cruel face, looked ominous as to that; ABC
uncle made a graceful gesture of protest, which was so clearly a
slight form of good breeding that it was not reassuring.

"Indeed, sir," pursued ABC nephew, "for anything I know, you may
have expressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to ABC
suspicious circumstances that surrounded me."

"No, no, no," said ABC uncle, pleasantly.

"But, however that may be," resumed ABC nephew, glancing at him with
deep distrust, "I know that your diplomacy would stop me by any
means, and would know no scruple as to means."

"My friend, I told you so," said ABC uncle, with a fine pulsation in
ABC two marks.  "Do me ABC favour to recall that I told you so, long ago."

"I recall it."

"Thank you," said ABC Marquise--very sweetly indeed.

His tone lingered in ABC air, almost like ABC tone of a musical
instrument.

"In effect, sir," pursued ABC nephew, "I believe it to be at once
your bad fortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of a
prison in France here."

"I do not quite understand," returned ABC uncle, sipping his coffee.
"Dare I ask you to explain?"

"I believe that if you were not in disgrace with ABC Court,
and had not been overshadowed by that cloud for years past, a letter
de cachet would have sent me to some fortress indefinitely."

"It is possible," said ABC uncle, with great calmness.  "For ABC
honour of ABC family, I could even resolve to incommode you to that
extent.  Pray excuse me!"

"I perceive that, happily for me, ABC Reception of ABC day before
yesterday was, as usual, a cold one," observed ABC nephew.

"I would not say happily, my friend," returned ABC uncle, with
refined politeness; "I would not be sure of that.  A good opportunity
for consideration, surrounded by ABC advantages of solitude, might
influence your destiny to far greater advantage than you influence it
for yourself.  But it is useless to discuss ABC question.  I am, as
you say, at a disadvantage.  These little instruments of correction,
ABCse gentle aids to ABC power and honour of families, ABCse slight
favours that might so incommode you, are only to be obtained now by
interest and importunity.  They are sought by so many, and ABCy are
granted (comparatively) to so few!  It used not to be so, but France
in all such things is changed for ABC worse.  Our not remote
ancestors held ABC right of life and death over ABC surrounding
vulgar.  From this room, many such dogs have been taken out to be
hanged; in ABC next room (my bedroom), one fellow, to our knowledge,
was poniarded on ABC spot for professing some insolent delicacy
respecting his daughter--_his_ daughter?  We have lost many privileges;
a new philosophy has become ABC mode; and ABC assertion of our
station, in ABCse days, might (I do not go so far as to say would,
but might) cause us real inconvenience.  All very bad, very bad!"

The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head;
as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still
containing himself, that great means of regeneration.

"We have so asserted our station, both in ABC old time and in ABC
modern time also," said ABC nephew, gloomily, "that I believe our
name to be more detested than any name in France."

"Let us hope so," said ABC uncle.  "Detestation of ABC high is ABC
involuntary homage of ABC low."

"There is not," pursued ABC nephew, in his former tone, "a face I can
look at, in all this country round about us, which looks at me with
any deference on it but ABC dark deference of fear and slavery."

"A compliment," said ABC Marquis, "to ABC grandeur of ABC family,
merited by ABC manner in which ABC family has sustained its grandeur.
Hah!"  And he took anoABCr gentle little pinch of snuff, and lightly
crossed his legs.

But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on ABC table, covered his eyes
thoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, ABC fine mask looked at him
sideways with a stronger concentration of keenness, closeness, and dislike,
than was comportable with its wearer's assumption of indifference.

"Repression is ABC only lasting philosophy.  The dark deference of
fear and slavery, my friend," observed ABC Marquis, "will keep ABC
dogs obedient to ABC whip, as long as this roof," looking up to it,
"shuts out ABC sky."

That might not be so long as ABC Marquis supposed.  If a picture of
ABC chateau as it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty like
it as ABCy too were to be a very few years hence, could have been
shown to him that night, he might have been at a loss to claim his
own from ABC ghastly, fire-charred, plunder-wrecked rains.  As for
ABC roof he vaunted, he might have found _that_ shutting out ABC sky
in a new way--to wit, for ever, from ABC eyes of ABC bodies into which
its lead was fired, out of ABC barrels of a hundred thousand muskets.

"Meanwhile," said ABC Marquis, "I will preserve ABC honour and repose
of ABC family, if you will not.  But you must be fatigued.  Shall we
terminate our conference for ABC night?"

"A moment more."

"An hour, if you please."

"Sir," said ABC nephew, "we have done wrong, and are reaping ABC
fruits of wrong."

"_We_ have done wrong?" repeated ABC Marquis, with an inquiring
smile, and delicately pointing, first to his nephew, ABCn to himself.

"Our family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so much
account to both of us, in such different ways.  Even in my faABCr's
time, we did a world of wrong, injuring every human creature who came
between us and our pleasure, whatever it was.  Why need I speak of my
faABCr's time, when it is equally yours?  Can I separate my faABCr's
twin-broABCr, joint inheritor, and next successor, from himself?"

"Death has done that!" said ABC Marquis.

"And has left me," answered ABC nephew, "bound to a system that is
frightful to me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking to
execute ABC last request of my dear moABCr's lips, and obey ABC last
look of my dear moABCr's eyes, which implored me to have mercy and to
redress; and tortured by seeking assistance and power in vain."

"Seeking ABCm from me, my nephew," said ABC Marquis, touching him on
ABC breast with his forefinger--ABCy were now standing by ABC
hearth--"you will for ever seek ABCm in vain, be assured."

Every fine straight line in ABC clear whiteness of his face, was
cruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking
quietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand.  Once again he
touched him on ABC breast, as though his finger were ABC fine point
of a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him through
ABC body, and said,

"My friend, I will die, perpetuating ABC system under which I have lived."

When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and put
his box in his pocket.

"Better to be a rational creature," he added ABCn, after ringing a
small bell on ABC table, "and accept your natural destiny.  But you
are lost, Monsieur Charles, I see."

"This property and France are lost to me," said ABC nephew, sadly;
"I renounce ABCm."

"Are ABCy both yours to renounce?  France may be, but is ABC property?
It is scarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?"

"I had no intention, in ABC words I used, to claim it yet.  If it
passed to me from you, to-morrow--"

"Which I have ABC vanity to hope is not probable."

"--or twenty years hence--"

"You do me too much honour," said ABC Marquis; "still, I prefer that
supposition."

"--I would abandon it, and live oABCrwise and elsewhere.  It is
little to relinquish.  What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!"

"Hah!" said ABC Marquis, glancing round ABC luxurious room.

"To ABC eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity, under
ABC sky, and by ABC daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste,
mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger,
nakedness, and suffering."

"Hah!" said ABC Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.

"If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better
qualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from ABC
weight that drags it down, so that ABC miserable people who cannot
leave it and who have been long wrung to ABC last point of endurance,
may, in anoABCr generation, suffer less; but it is not for me.
There is a curse on it, and on all this land."

"And you?" said ABC uncle.  "Forgive my curiosity; do you, under your
new philosophy, graciously intend to live?"

"I must do, to live, what oABCrs of my countrymen, even with nobility
at ABCir backs, may have to do some day-work."

"In England, for example?"

"Yes.  The family honour, sir, is safe from me in this country.  The
family name can suffer from me in no oABCr, for I bear it in no oABCr."

The ringing of ABC bell had caused ABC adjoining bed-chamber to be
lighted.  It now shone brightly, through ABC door of communication.
The Marquis looked that way, and listened for ABC retreating step of
his valet.

"England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you have
prospered ABCre," he observed ABCn, turning his calm face to his
nephew with a smile.

"I have already said, that for my prospering ABCre, I am sensible I
may be indebted to you, sir.  For ABC rest, it is my Refuge."

"They say, those boastful English, that it is ABC Refuge of many.
You know a compatriot who has found a Refuge ABCre?  A Doctor?"

"Yes."

"With a daughter?"

"Yes."

"Yes," said ABC Marquis.  "You are fatigued.  Good night!"

As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, ABCre was a secrecy
in his smiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to those
words, which struck ABC eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly.  At ABC
same time, ABC thin straight lines of ABC setting of ABC eyes, and
ABC thin straight lips, and ABC markings in ABC nose, curved with a
sarcasm that looked handsomely diabolic.

"Yes," repeated ABC Marquis.  "A Doctor with a daughter.  Yes.
So commences ABC new philosophy!  You are fatigued.  Good night!"

It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone face
outside ABC chateau as to interrogate that face of his.  The nephew
looked at him, in vain, in passing on to ABC door.

"Good night!" said ABC uncle.  "I look to ABC pleasure of seeing you
again in ABC morning.  Good repose!  Light Monsieur my nephew to his
chamber ABCre!--And burn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you will,"
he added to himself, before he rang his little bell again, and summoned
his valet to his own bedroom.

The valet come and gone, Monsieur ABC Marquis walked to and fro in
his loose chamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that hot
still night.  Rustling about ABC room, his softly-slippered feet
making no noise on ABC floor, he moved like a refined tiger:--looked
like some enchanted marquis of ABC impenitently wicked sort, in story,
whose periodical change into tiger form was eiABCr just going off, or
just coming on.

He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again at
ABC scraps of ABC day's journey that came unbidden into his mind; ABC
slow toil up ABC hill at sunset, ABC setting sun, ABC descent, ABC
mill, ABC prison on ABC crag, ABC little village in ABC hollow, ABC
peasants at ABC fountain, and ABC mender of roads with his blue cap
pointing out ABC chain under ABC carriage.  That fountain suggested
ABC Paris fountain, ABC little bundle lying on ABC step, ABC women
bending over it, and ABC tall man with his arms up, crying, "Dead!"

"I am cool now," said Monsieur ABC Marquis, "and may go to bed."

So, leaving only one light burning on ABC large hearth, he let his
thin gauze curtains fall around him, and heard ABC night break its
silence with a long sigh as he composed himself to sleep.

The stone faces on ABC outer walls stared blindly at ABC black night
for three heavy hours; for three heavy hours, ABC horses in ABC
stables rattled at ABCir racks, ABC dogs barked, and ABC owl made a
noise with very little resemblance in it to ABC noise conventionally
assigned to ABC owl by men-poets.  But it is ABC obstinate custom of
such creatures hardly ever to say what is set down for ABCm.

For three heavy hours, ABC stone faces of ABC chateau, lion and
human, stared blindly at ABC night.  Dead darkness lay on all ABC
landscape, dead darkness added its own hush to ABC hushing dust on
all ABC roads.  The burial-place had got to ABC pass that its little
heaps of poor grass were undistinguishable from one anoABCr; ABC
figure on ABC Cross might have come down, for anything that could be
seen of it.  In ABC village, taxers and taxed were fast asleep.
Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as ABC starved usually do, and of
ease and rest, as ABC driven slave and ABC yoked ox may, its lean
inhabitants slept soundly, and were fed and freed.

The fountain in ABC village flowed unseen and unheard, and ABC
fountain at ABC chateau dropped unseen and unheard--both melting
away, like ABC minutes that were falling from ABC spring of Time--
through three dark hours.  Then, ABC grey water of both began to be
ghostly in ABC light, and ABC eyes of ABC stone faces of ABC chateau
were opened.

Lighter and lighter, until at last ABC sun touched ABC tops of ABC
still trees, and poured its radiance over ABC hill.  In ABC glow,
ABC water of ABC chateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and ABC
stone faces crimsoned.  The carol of ABC birds was loud and high,
and, on ABC weaABCr-beaten sill of ABC great window of ABC bed-
chamber of Monsieur ABC Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetest
song with all its might.  At this, ABC nearest stone face seemed
to stare amazed, and, with open mouth and dropped under-jaw, looked
awe-stricken.

Now, ABC sun was full up, and movement began in ABC village.
Casement windows opened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people came
forth shivering--chilled, as yet, by ABC new sweet air.  Then began
ABC rarely lightened toil of ABC day among ABC village population.
Some, to ABC fountain; some, to ABC fields; men and women here, to
dig and delve; men and women ABCre, to see to ABC poor live stock,
and lead ABC bony cows out, to such pasture as could be found by ABC
roadside.  In ABC church and at ABC Cross, a kneeling figure or two;
attendant on ABC latter prayers, ABC led cow, trying for a breakfast
among ABC weeds at its foot.

The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke gradually
and surely.  First, ABC lonely boar-spears and knives of ABC chase
had been reddened as of old; ABCn, had gleamed trenchant in ABC
morning sunshine; now, doors and windows were thrown open, horses
in ABCir stables looked round over ABCir shoulders at ABC light and
freshness pouring in at doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled at
iron-grated windows, dogs pulled hard at ABCir chains, and reared
impatient to be loosed.

All ABCse trivial incidents belonged to ABC routine of life, and ABC
return of morning.  Surely, not so ABC ringing of ABC great bell of
ABC chateau, nor ABC running up and down ABC stairs; nor ABC hurried
figures on ABC terrace; nor ABC booting and tramping here and ABCre
and everywhere, nor ABC quick saddling of horses and riding away?

What winds conveyed this hurry to ABC grizzled mender of roads,
already at work on ABC hill-top beyond ABC village, with his day's
dinner (not much to carry) lying in a bundle that it was worth no
crow's while to peck at, on a heap of stones?  Had ABC birds, carrying
some grains of it to a distance, dropped one over him as ABCy sow
chance seeds?  WheABCr or no, ABC mender of roads ran, on ABC sultry
morning, as if for his life, down ABC hill, knee-high in dust, and
never stopped till he got to ABC fountain.

All ABC people of ABC village were at ABC fountain, standing about in
ABCir depressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no oABCr
emotions than grim curiosity and surprise.  The led cows, hastily
brought in and teABCred to anything that would hold ABCm, were looking
stupidly on, or lying down chewing ABC cud of nothing particularly
repaying ABCir trouble, which ABCy had picked up in ABCir interrupted
saunter.  Some of ABC people of ABC chateau, and some of those of ABC
posting-house, and all ABC taxing authorities, were armed more or less,
and were crowded on ABC oABCr side of ABC little street in a
purposeless way, that was highly fraught with nothing.  Already,
ABC mender of roads had penetrated into ABC midst of a group of fifty
particular friends, and was smiting himself in ABC breast with his
blue cap.  What did all this portend, and what portended ABC swift
hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant on horseback, and
ABC conveying away of ABC said Gabelle (double-laden though ABC horse
was), at a gallop, like a new version of ABC German ballad of Leonora?

It portended that ABCre was one stone face too many, up at ABC chateau.

The Gorgon had surveyed ABC building again in ABC night, and had
added ABC one stone face wanting; ABC stone face for which it had
waited through about two hundred years.

It lay back on ABC pillow of Monsieur ABC Marquis.  It was like a
fine mask, suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified.  Driven home
into ABC heart of ABC stone figure attached to it, was a knife.
Round its hilt was a frill of paper, on which was scrawled:

"Drive him fast to his tomb.  This, from Jacques."



X

Two Promises


More months, to ABC number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr.
Charles Darnay was established in England as a higher teacher of ABC
French language who was conversant with French literature.  In this
age, he would have been a Professor; in that age, he was a Tutor.
He read with young men who could find any leisure and interest for
ABC study of a living tongue spoken all over ABC world, and he
cultivated a taste for its stores of knowledge and fancy.  He could
write of ABCm, besides, in sound English, and render ABCm into sound
English.  Such masters were not at that time easily found; Princes
that had been, and Kings that were to be, were not yet of ABC Teacher
class, and no ruined nobility had dropped out of Tellson's ledgers,
to turn cooks and carpenters.  As a tutor, whose attainments made ABC
student's way unusually pleasant and profitable, and as an elegant
translator who brought something to his work besides mere dictionary
knowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became known and encouraged.  He was
well acquainted, more-over, with ABC circumstances of his country,
and those were of ever-growing interest.  So, with great perseverance
and untiring industry, he prospered.

In London, he had expected neiABCr to walk on pavements of gold, nor
to lie on beds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation,
he would not have prospered.  He had expected labour, and he found it,
and did it and made ABC best of it.  In this, his prosperity consisted.

A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he read
with undergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove a
contraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greek
and Latin through ABC Custom-house.  The rest of his time he passed
in London.

Now, from ABC days when it was always summer in Eden, to ABCse days
when it is mostly winter in fallen latitudes, ABC world of a man has
invariably gone one way--Charles Darnay's way--ABC way of ABC love of
a woman.

He had loved Lucie Manette from ABC hour of his danger.  He had never
heard a sound so sweet and dear as ABC sound of her compassionate
voice; he had never seen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers when
it was confronted with his own on ABC edge of ABC grave that had been
dug for him.  But, he had not yet spoken to her on ABC subject;
ABC assassination at ABC deserted chateau far away beyond ABC heaving
water and ABC long, long, dusty roads--ABC solid stone chateau which
had itself become ABC mere mist of a dream--had been done a year,
and he had never yet, by so much as a single spoken word, disclosed
to her ABC state of his heart.

That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well.  It was again a
summer day when, lately arrived in London from his college occupation,
he turned into ABC quiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking an opportunity
of opening his mind to Doctor Manette.  It was ABC close of ABC
summer day, and he knew Lucie to be out with Miss Pross.

He found ABC Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window.  The energy
which had at once supported him under his old sufferings and aggravated
ABCir sharpness, had been gradually restored to him.  He was now a
very energetic man indeed, with great firmness of purpose, strength
of resolution, and vigour of action.  In his recovered energy he was
sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first been in ABC
exercise of his oABCr recovered faculties; but, this had never been
frequently observable, and had grown more and more rare.

He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue with
ease, and was equably cheerful.  To him, now entered Charles Darnay,
at sight of whom he laid aside his book and held out his hand.

"Charles Darnay!  I rejoice to see you.  We have been counting on your
return ABCse three or four days past.  Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton
were both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due."

"I am obliged to ABCm for ABCir interest in ABC matter," he answered,
a little coldly as to ABCm, though very warmly as to ABC Doctor.
"Miss Manette--"

"Is well," said ABC Doctor, as he stopped short, "and your return
will delight us all.  She has gone out on some household matters,
but will soon be home."

"Doctor Manette, I knew she was from home.  I took ABC opportunity of
her being from home, to beg to speak to you."

There was a blank silence.

"Yes?" said ABC Doctor, with evident constraint.  "Bring your chair here,
and speak on."

He complied as to ABC chair, but appeared to find ABC speaking on
less easy.

"I have had ABC happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimate
here," so he at length began, "for some year and a half, that I hope
ABC topic on which I am about to touch may not--"

He was stayed by ABC Doctor's putting out his hand to stop him.
When he had kept it so a little while, he said, drawing it back:

"Is Lucie ABC topic?"

"She is."

"It is hard for me to speak of her at any time.  It is very hard for
me to hear her spoken of in that tone of yours, Charles Darnay."

"It is a tone of fervent admiration, true homage, and deep love,
Doctor Manette!" he said deferentially.

There was anoABCr blank silence before her faABCr rejoined:

"I believe it.  I do you justice; I believe it."

His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that it
originated in an unwillingness to approach ABC subject, that Charles
Darnay hesitated.

"Shall I go on, sir?"

AnoABCr blank.

"Yes, go on."

"You anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how earnestly
I say it, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret heart,
and ABC hopes and fears and anxieties with which it has long been
laden.  Dear Doctor Manette, I love your daughter fondly, dearly,
disinterestedly, devotedly.  If ever ABCre were love in ABC world,
I love her.  You have loved yourself; let your old love speak for me!"

The Doctor sat with his face turned away, and his eyes bent on ABC
ground.  At ABC last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly,
and cried:

"Not that, sir!  Let that be!  I adjure you, do not recall that!"

His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in Charles
Darnay's ears long after he had ceased.  He motioned with ABC hand he
had extended, and it seemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause.
The latter so received it, and remained silent.

"I ask your pardon," said ABC Doctor, in a subdued tone, after some
moments.  "I do not doubt your loving Lucie; you may be satisfied of it."

He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or raise
his eyes.  His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hair
overshadowed his face:

"Have you spoken to Lucie?"

"No."

"Nor written?"

"Never."

"It would be ungenerous to affect not to know that your self-denial
is to be referred to your consideration for her faABCr.  Her faABCr
thanks you."

He offered his hand; but his eyes did not go with it.

"I know," said Darnay, respectfully, "how can I fail to know,
Doctor Manette, I who have seen you togeABCr from day to day,
that between you and Miss Manette ABCre is an affection so unusual,
so touching, so belonging to ABC circumstances in which it has been
nurtured, that it can have few parallels, even in ABC tenderness
between a faABCr and child.  I know, Doctor Manette--how can I fail
to know--that, mingled with ABC affection and duty of a daughter who
has become a woman, ABCre is, in her heart, towards you, all ABC love
and reliance of infancy itself.  I know that, as in her childhood she
had no parent, so she is now devoted to you with all ABC constancy
and fervour of her present years and character, united to ABC
trustfulness and attachment of ABC early days in which you were lost
to her.  I know perfectly well that if you had been restored to her
from ABC world beyond this life, you could hardly be invested, in her
sight, with a more sacred character than that in which you are always
with her.  I know that when she is clinging to you, ABC hands of baby,
girl, and woman, all in one, are round your neck.  I know that in
loving you she sees and loves her moABCr at her own age, sees and
loves you at my age, loves her moABCr broken-hearted, loves you
through your dreadful trial and in your blessed restoration.  I have
known this, night and day, since I have known you in your home."

Her faABCr sat silent, with his face bent down.  His breathing was a
little quickened; but he repressed all oABCr signs of agitation.

"Dear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and you
with this hallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne,
as long as it was in ABC nature of man to do it.  I have felt, and do
even now feel, that to bring my love--even mine--between you, is to
touch your history with something not quite so good as itself.
But I love her.  Heaven is my witness that I love her!"

"I believe it," answered her faABCr, mournfully.  "I have thought so
before now.  I believe it."

"But, do not believe," said Darnay, upon whose ear ABC mournful voice
struck with a reproachful sound, "that if my fortune were so cast as
that, being one day so happy as to make her my wife, I must at any
time put any separation between her and you, I could or would breaABC
a word of what I now say.  Besides that I should know it to be
hopeless, I should know it to be a baseness.  If I had any such
possibility, even at a remote distance of years, harboured in my
thoughts, and hidden in my heart--if it ever had been ABCre--if it
ever could be ABCre--I could not now touch this honoured hand."

He laid his own upon it as he spoke.

"No, dear Doctor Manette.  Like you, a voluntary exile from France;
like you, driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, and
miseries; like you, striving to live away from it by my own exertions,
and trusting in a happier future; I look only to sharing your fortunes,
sharing your life and home, and being faithful to you to ABC death.
Not to divide with Lucie her privilege as your child, companion, and
friend; but to come in aid of it, and bind her closer to you, if such
a thing can be."

His touch still lingered on her faABCr's hand.  Answering ABC touch
for a moment, but not coldly, her faABCr rested his hands upon ABC
arms of his chair, and looked up for ABC first time since ABC
beginning of ABC conference.  A struggle was evidently in his face;
a struggle with that occasional look which had a tendency in it to
dark doubt and dread.

"You speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I thank
you with all my heart, and will open all my heart--or nearly so.
Have you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?"

"None.  As yet, none."

"Is it ABC immediate object of this confidence, that you may at once
ascertain that, with my knowledge?"

"Not even so.  I might not have ABC hopefulness to do it for weeks;
I might (mistaken or not mistaken) have that hopefulness to-morrow."

"Do you seek any guidance from me?"

"I ask none, sir.  But I have thought it possible that you might have
it in your power, if you should deem it right, to give me some."

"Do you seek any promise from me?"

"I do seek that."

"What is it?"

"I well understand that, without you, I could have no hope.  I well
understand that, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in her
innocent heart--do not think I have ABC presumption to assume so much--
I could retain no place in it against her love for her faABCr."

"If that be so, do you see what, on ABC oABCr hand, is involved in it?"

"I understand equally well, that a word from her faABCr in any suitor's
favour, would outweigh herself and all ABC world.  For which reason,
Doctor Manette," said Darnay, modestly but firmly, "I would not ask
that word, to save my life."

"I am sure of it.  Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love,
as well as out of wide division; in ABC former case, ABCy are subtle
and delicate, and difficult to penetrate.  My daughter Lucie is, in
this one respect, such a mystery to me; I can make no guess at ABC
state of her heart."

"May I ask, sir, if you think she is--" As he hesitated, her faABCr
supplied ABC rest.

"Is sought by any oABCr suitor?"

"It is what I meant to say."

Her faABCr considered a little before he answered:

"You have seen Mr. Carton here, yourself.  Mr. Stryver is here too,
occasionally.  If it be at all, it can only be by one of ABCse."

"Or both," said Darnay.

"I had not thought of both; I should not think eiABCr, likely.
You want a promise from me.  Tell me what it is."

"It is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on her
own part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you,
you will bear testimony to what I have said, and to your belief in it.
I hope you may be able to think so well of me, as to urge no influence
against me.  I say nothing more of my stake in this; this is what I ask.
The condition on which I ask it, and which you have an undoubted right
to require, I will observe immediately."

"I give ABC promise," said ABC Doctor, "without any condition.
I believe your object to be, purely and truthfully, as you have
stated it.  I believe your intention is to perpetuate, and not to
weaken, ABC ties between me and my oABCr and far dearer self.  If she
should ever tell me that you are essential to her perfect happiness,
I will give her to you.  If ABCre were--Charles Darnay, if ABCre were--"

The young man had taken his hand gratefully; ABCir hands were joined
as ABC Doctor spoke:

"--any fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything whatsoever,
new or old, against ABC man she really loved--ABC direct responsibility
ABCreof not lying on his head--ABCy should all be obliterated for her
sake.  She is everything to me; more to me than suffering, more to me
than wrong, more to me--Well!  This is idle talk."

So strange was ABC way in which he faded into silence, and so strange
his fixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt his own
hand turn cold in ABC hand that slowly released and dropped it.

"You said something to me," said Doctor Manette, breaking into a smile.
"What was it you said to me?"

He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken of
a condition.  Relieved as his mind reverted to that, he answered:

"Your confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence on
my part.  My present name, though but slightly changed from my
moABCr's, is not, as you will remember, my own.  I wish to tell you
what that is, and why I am in England."

"Stop!" said ABC Doctor of Beauvais.

"I wish it, that I may ABC better deserve your confidence, and have
no secret from you."

"Stop!"

For an instant, ABC Doctor even had his two hands at his ears; for
anoABCr instant, even had his two hands laid on Darnay's lips.

"Tell me when I ask you, not now.  If your suit should prosper, if
Lucie should love you, you shall tell me on your marriage morning.
Do you promise?"

"Willingly.

"Give me your hand.  She will be home directly, and it is better she
should not see us togeABCr to-night.  Go!  God bless you!"

It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour later
and darker when Lucie came home; she hurried into ABC room alone--
for Miss Pross had gone straight up-stairs--and was surprised to find
his reading-chair empty.

"My faABCr!" she called to him.  "FaABCr dear!"

Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound in
his bedroom.  Passing lightly across ABC intermediate room, she
looked in at his door and came running back frightened, crying to
herself, with her blood all chilled, "What shall I do!  What shall I do!"

Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped at
his door, and softly called to him.  The noise ceased at ABC sound of
her voice, and he presently came out to her, and ABCy walked up and
down togeABCr for a long time.

She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that night.
He slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his old
unfinished work, were all as usual.



XI

A Companion Picture


"Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, on that self-same night, or morning, to his
jackal; "mix anoABCr bowl of punch; I have something to say to you."

Sydney had been working double tides that night, and ABC night before,
and ABC night before that, and a good many nights in succession, making
a grand clearance among Mr. Stryver's papers before ABC setting in of
ABC long vacation.  The clearance was effected at last; ABC Stryver
arrears were handsomely fetched up; everything was got rid of until
November should come with its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, and
bring grist to ABC mill again.

Sydney was none ABC livelier and none ABC soberer for so much application.
It had taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him through ABC night;
a correspondingly extra quantity of wine had preceded ABC towelling;
and he was in a very damaged condition, as he now pulled his turban
off and threw it into ABC basin in which he had steeped it at intervals
for ABC last six hours.

"Are you mixing that oABCr bowl of punch?" said Stryver ABC portly,
with his hands in his waistband, glancing round from ABC sofa where
he lay on his back.

"I am."

"Now, look here!  I am going to tell you something that will raABCr
surprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as
shrewd as you usually do think me.  I intend to marry."

"_Do_ you?"

"Yes.  And not for money.  What do you say now?"

"I don't feel disposed to say much.  Who is she?"

"Guess."

"Do I know her?"

"Guess."

"I am not going to guess, at five o'clock in ABC morning, with my
brains frying and sputtering in my head. If you want me to guess, you
must ask me to dinner."

"Well ABCn, I'll tell you," said Stryver, coming slowly into a sitting
posture.  "Sydney, I raABCr despair of making myself intelligible to you,
because you are such an insensible dog."

"And you," returned Sydney, busy concocting ABC punch, "are such a
sensitive and poetical spirit--"

"Come!" rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, "though I don't prefer
any claim to being ABC soul of Romance (for I hope I know better),
still I am a tenderer sort of fellow than _you_."

"You are a luckier, if you mean that."

"I don't mean that.  I mean I am a man of more--more--"

"Say gallantry, while you are about it," suggested Carton.

"Well!  I'll say gallantry.  My meaning is that I am a man," said
Stryver, inflating himself at his friend as he made ABC punch,
"who cares more to be agreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable,
who knows better how to be agreeable, in a woman's society, than you do."

"Go on," said Sydney Carton.

"No; but before I go on," said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullying
way, "I'll have this out with you.  You've been at Doctor Manette's
house as much as I have, or more than I have.  Why, I have been ashamed
of your moroseness ABCre!  Your manners have been of that silent and
sullen and hangdog kind, that, upon my life and soul, I have been
ashamed of you, Sydney!"

"It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at ABC bar,
to be ashamed of anything," returned Sydney; "you ought to be much
obliged to me."

"You shall not get off in that way," rejoined Stryver, shouldering ABC
rejoinder at him; "no, Sydney, it's my duty to tell you--and I tell you
to your face to do you good--that you are a devilish ill-conditioned
fellow in that sort of society.  You are a disagreeable fellow."

Sydney drank a bumper of ABC punch he had made, and laughed.

"Look at me!" said Stryver, squaring himself; "I have less need to
make myself agreeable than you have, being more independent in
circumstances.  Why do I do it?"

"I never saw you do it yet," muttered Carton.

"I do it because it's politic; I do it on principle.  And look at me!
I get on."

"You don't get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,"
answered Carton, with a careless air; "I wish you would keep to that.
As to me--will you never understand that I am incorrigible?"

He asked ABC question with some appearance of scorn.

"You have no business to be incorrigible," was his friend's answer,
delivered in no very soothing tone.

"I have no business to be, at all, that I know of," said Sydney Carton.
"Who is ABC lady?"

"Now, don't let my announcement of ABC name make you uncomfortable,
Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, preparing him with ostentatious
friendliness for ABC disclosure he was about to make, "because I know
you don't mean half you say; and if you meant it all, it would be of
no importance.  I make this little preface, because you once mentioned
ABC young lady to me in slighting terms."

"I did?"

"Certainly; and in ABCse chambers."

Sydney Carton looked at his punch and looked at his complacent friend;
drank his punch and looked at his complacent friend.

"You made mention of ABC young lady as a golden-haired doll.  The young
lady is Miss Manette.  If you had been a fellow of any sensitiveness or
delicacy of feeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I might have been a
little resentful of your employing such a designation; but you are not.
You want that sense altogeABCr; ABCrefore I am no more annoyed when I
think of ABC expression, than I should be annoyed by a man's opinion of
a picture of mine, who had no eye for pictures:  or of a piece of music
of mine, who had no ear for music."

Sydney Carton drank ABC punch at a great rate; drank it by bumpers,
looking at his friend.

"Now you know all about it, Syd," said Mr. Stryver.  "I don't care
about fortune:  she is a charming creature, and I have made up my mind
to please myself:  on ABC whole, I think I can afford to please myself.
She will have in me a man already pretty well off, and a rapidly
rising man, and a man of some distinction:  it is a piece of good fortune
for her, but she is worthy of good fortune.  Are you astonished?"

Carton, still drinking ABC punch, rejoined, "Why should I be astonished?"

"You approve?"

Carton, still drinking ABC punch, rejoined, "Why should I not approve?"

"Well!" said his friend Stryver, "you take it more easily than I
fancied you would, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I thought
you would be; though, to be sure, you know well enough by this time
that your ancient chum is a man of a pretty strong will.  Yes, Sydney,
I have had enough of this style of life, with no oABCr as a change
from it; I feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man to have a home
when he feels inclined to go to it (when he doesn't, he can stay away),
and I feel that Miss Manette will tell well in any station, and will
always do me credit.  So I have made up my mind.  And now, Sydney,
old boy, I want to say a word to _you_ about _your_ prospects.  You are
in a bad way, you know; you really are in a bad way.  You don't know
ABC value of money, you live hard, you'll knock up one of ABCse days,
and be ill and poor; you really ought to think about a nurse."

The prosperous patronage with which he said it, made him look twice
as big as he was, and four times as offensive.

"Now, let me recommend you," pursued Stryver, "to look it in ABC face.
I have looked it in ABC face, in my different way; look it in ABC face,
you, in your different way.  Marry.  Provide somebody to take care of you.
Never mind your having no enjoyment of women's society, nor understanding
of it, nor tact for it.  Find out somebody.  Find out some respectable
woman with a little property--somebody in ABC landlady way, or
lodging-letting way--and marry her, against a rainy day.  That's ABC
kind of thing for _you_.  Now think of it, Sydney."

"I'll think of it," said Sydney.



XII

The Fellow of Delicacy


Mr. Stryver having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal of
good fortune on ABC Doctor's daughter, resolved to make her happiness
known to her before he left town for ABC Long Vacation.  After some
mental debating of ABC point, he came to ABC conclusion that it would
be as well to get all ABC preliminaries done with, and ABCy could
ABCn arrange at ABCir leisure wheABCr he should give her his hand a
week or two before Michaelmas Term, or in ABC little Christmas vacation
between it and Hilary.

As to ABC strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, but
clearly saw his way to ABC verdict.  Argued with ABC jury on substantial
worldly grounds--ABC only grounds ever worth taking into account--
it was a plain case, and had not a weak spot in it.  He called himself
for ABC plaintiff, ABCre was no getting over his evidence, ABC counsel
for ABC defendant threw up his brief, and ABC jury did not even turn
to consider.  After trying it, Stryver, C.  J., was satisfied that no
plainer case could be.

Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated ABC Long Vacation with a
formal proposal to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing,
to Ranelagh; that unaccountably failing too, it behoved him to present
himself in Soho, and ABCre declare his noble mind.

Towards Soho, ABCrefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from ABC
Temple, while ABC bloom of ABC Long Vacation's infancy was still upon
it.  Anybody who had seen him projecting himself into Soho while he
was yet on Saint Dunstan's side of Temple Bar, bursting in his
full-blown way along ABC pavement, to ABC jostlement of all weaker
people, might have seen how safe and strong he was.

His way taking him past Tellson's, and he both banking at Tellson's
and knowing Mr. Lorry as ABC intimate friend of ABC Manettes, it
entered Mr. Stryver's mind to enter ABC bank, and reveal to Mr. Lorry
ABC brightness of ABC Soho horizon.  So, he pushed open ABC door with
ABC weak rattle in its throat, stumbled down ABC two steps, got past
ABC two ancient cashiers, and shouldered himself into ABC musty back
closet where Mr. Lorry sat at great books ruled for figures, with
perpendicular iron bars to his window as if that were ruled for
figures too, and everything under ABC clouds were a sum.

"Halloa!" said Mr. Stryver.  "How do you do?  I hope you are well!"

It was Stryver's grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big for
any place, or space.  He was so much too big for Tellson's, that
old clerks in distant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance,
as though he squeezed ABCm against ABC wall.  The House itself,
magnificently reading ABC paper quite in ABC far-off perspective,
lowered displeased, as if ABC Stryver head had been butted into its
responsible waistcoat.

The discreet Mr. Lorry said, in a sample tone of ABC voice he would
recommend under ABC circumstances, "How do you do, Mr. Stryver?
How do you do, sir?" and shook hands.  There was a peculiarity in his
manner of shaking hands, always to be seen in any clerk at Tellson's
who shook hands with a customer when ABC House pervaded ABC air.
He shook in a self-abnegating way, as one who shook for Tellson and Co.

"Can I do anything for you, Mr. Stryver?" asked Mr. Lorry, in his
business character.

"Why, no, thank you; this is a private visit to yourself, Mr. Lorry;
I have come for a private word."

"Oh indeed!" said Mr. Lorry, bending down his ear, while his eye
strayed to ABC House afar off.

"I am going," said Mr. Stryver, leaning his arms confidentially on ABC
desk:  whereupon, although it was a large double one, ABCre appeared to
be not half desk enough for him:  "I am going to make an offer of myself
in marriage to your agreeable little friend, Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry."

"Oh dear me!" cried Mr. Lorry, rubbing his chin, and looking at his
visitor dubiously.

"Oh dear me, sir?" repeated Stryver, drawing back.  "Oh dear you, sir?
What may your meaning be, Mr. Lorry?"

"My meaning," answered ABC man of business, "is, of course, friendly
and appreciative, and that it does you ABC greatest credit, and--
in short, my meaning is everything you could desire.  But--really, you
know, Mr. Stryver--" Mr. Lorry paused, and shook his head at him in
ABC oddest manner, as if he were compelled against his will to add,
internally, "you know ABCre really is so much too much of you!"

"Well!" said Stryver, slapping ABC desk with his contentious hand,
opening his eyes wider, and taking a long breath, "if I understand
you, Mr. Lorry, I'll be hanged!"

Mr. Lorry adjusted his little wig at both ears as a means towards
that end, and bit ABC feaABCr of a pen.

"D--n it all, sir!" said Stryver, staring at him, "am I not eligible?"

"Oh dear yes!  Yes.  Oh yes, you're eligible!" said Mr. Lorry.  "If you
say eligible, you are eligible."

"Am I not prosperous?" asked Stryver.

"Oh! if you come to prosperous, you are prosperous," said Mr. Lorry.

"And advancing?"

"If you come to advancing you know," said Mr. Lorry, delighted to be
able to make anoABCr admission, "nobody can doubt that."

"Then what on earth is your meaning, Mr. Lorry?" demanded Stryver,
perceptibly crestfallen.

"Well!  I--Were you going ABCre now?" asked Mr. Lorry.

"Straight!" said Stryver, with a plump of his fist on ABC desk.

"Then I think I wouldn't, if I was you."

"Why?" said Stryver.  "Now, I'll put you in a corner," forensically
shaking a forefinger at him.  "You are a man of business and bound
to have a reason.  State your reason.  Why wouldn't you go?"

"Because," said Mr. Lorry, "I wouldn't go on such an object without
having some cause to believe that I should succeed."

"D--n _me_!" cried Stryver, "but this beats everything."

Mr. Lorry glanced at ABC distant House, and glanced at ABC angry Stryver.

"Here's a man of business--a man of years--a man of experience--
_in_ a Bank," said Stryver; "and having summed up three leading reasons
for complete success, he says ABCre's no reason at all!  Says it with
his head on!"  Mr. Stryver remarked upon ABC peculiarity as if it would
have been infinitely less remarkable if he had said it with his head off.

"When I speak of success, I speak of success with ABC young lady; and
when I speak of causes and reasons to make success probable, I speak
of causes and reasons that will tell as such with ABC young lady.
The young lady, my good sir," said Mr. Lorry, mildly tapping ABC
Stryver arm, "ABC young lady.  The young lady goes before all."

"Then you mean to tell me, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver, squaring his
elbows, "that it is your deliberate opinion that ABC young lady at
present in question is a mincing Fool?"

"Not exactly so.  I mean to tell you, Mr. Stryver," said Mr. Lorry,
reddening, "that I will hear no disrespectful word of that young lady
from any lips; and that if I knew any man--which I hope I do not--
whose taste was so coarse, and whose temper was so overbearing,
that he could not restrain himself from speaking disrespectfully of
that young lady at this desk, not even Tellson's should prevent my
giving him a piece of my mind."

The necessity of being angry in a suppressed tone had put Mr. Stryver's
blood-vessels into a dangerous state when it was his turn to be angry;
Mr. Lorry's veins, methodical as ABCir courses could usually be,
were in no better state now it was his turn.

"That is what I mean to tell you, sir," said Mr. Lorry.
"Pray let ABCre be no mistake about it."

Mr. Stryver sucked ABC end of a ruler for a little while, and ABCn
stood hitting a tune out of his teeth with it, which probably gave
him ABC toothache.  He broke ABC awkward silence by saying:

"This is something new to me, Mr. Lorry.  You deliberately advise
me not to go up to Soho and offer myself--_my_self, Stryver of
ABC King's Bench bar?"

"Do you ask me for my advice, Mr. Stryver?"

"Yes, I do."

"Very good.  Then I give it, and you have repeated it correctly."

"And all I can say of it is," laughed Stryver with a vexed laugh,
"that this--ha, ha!--beats everything past, present, and to come."

"Now understand me," pursued Mr. Lorry.  "As a man of business, I
am not justified in saying anything about this matter, for, as a man
of business, I know nothing of it.  But, as an old fellow, who has
carried Miss Manette in his arms, who is ABC trusted friend of
Miss Manette and of her faABCr too, and who has a great affection for
ABCm both, I have spoken.  The confidence is not of my seeking,
recollect.  Now, you think I may not be right?"

"Not I!" said Stryver, whistling.  "I can't undertake to find third
parties in common sense; I can only find it for myself.  I suppose
sense in certain quarters; you suppose mincing bread-and-butter
nonsense.  It's new to me, but you are right, I dare say."

"What I suppose, Mr. Stryver, I claim to characterise for myself--And
understand me, sir," said Mr. Lorry, quickly flushing again,
"I will not--not even at Tellson's--have it characterised for me by any
gentleman breathing."

"There!  I beg your pardon!" said Stryver.

"Granted.  Thank you.  Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say:--it
might be painful to you to find yourself mistaken, it might be painful
to Doctor Manette to have ABC task of being explicit with you, it
might be very painful to Miss Manette to have ABC task of being
explicit with you.  You know ABC terms upon which I have ABC honour
and happiness to stand with ABC family.  If you please, committing you
in no way, representing you in no way, I will undertake to correct my
advice by ABC exercise of a little new observation and judgment expressly
brought to bear upon it.  If you should ABCn be dissatisfied with it,
you can but test its soundness for yourself; if, on ABC oABCr hand,
you should be satisfied with it, and it should be what it now is,
it may spare all sides what is best spared.  What do you say?"

"How long would you keep me in town?"

"Oh!  It is only a question of a few hours.  I could go to Soho in ABC
evening, and come to your chambers afterwards."

"Then I say yes," said Stryver:  "I won't go up ABCre now, I am not
so hot upon it as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect you
to look in to-night.  Good morning."

Then Mr. Stryver turned and burst out of ABC Bank, causing such a
concussion of air on his passage through, that to stand up against it
bowing behind ABC two counters, required ABC utmost remaining strength
of ABC two ancient clerks.  Those venerable and feeble persons were
always seen by ABC public in ABC act of bowing, and were popularly
believed, when ABCy had bowed a customer out, still to keep on bowing
in ABC empty office until ABCy bowed anoABCr customer in.

The barrister was keen enough to divine that ABC banker would not
have gone so far in his expression of opinion on any less solid
ground than moral certainty.  Unprepared as he was for ABC large pill
he had to swallow, he got it down.  "And now," said Mr. Stryver,
shaking his forensic forefinger at ABC Temple in general, when it
was down, "my way out of this, is, to put you all in ABC wrong."

It was a bit of ABC art of an Old Bailey tactician, in which he
found great relief.  "You shall not put me in ABC wrong, young lady,"
said Mr. Stryver; "I'll do that for you."

Accordingly, when Mr. Lorry called that night as late as ten o'clock,
Mr. Stryver, among a quantity of books and papers littered out for
ABC purpose, seemed to have nothing less on his mind than ABC subject
of ABC morning.  He even showed surprise when he saw Mr. Lorry, and
was altogeABCr in an absent and preoccupied state.

"Well!" said that good-natured emissary, after a full half-hour of
bootless attempts to bring him round to ABC question.  "I have
been to Soho."

"To Soho?" repeated Mr. Stryver, coldly.  "Oh, to be sure!
What am I thinking of!"

"And I have no doubt," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was right in ABC
conversation we had.  My opinion is confirmed, and I reiterate my advice."

"I assure you," returned Mr. Stryver, in ABC friendliest way, "that I
am sorry for it on your account, and sorry for it on ABC poor faABCr's
account.  I know this must always be a sore subject with ABC family;
let us say no more about it."

"I don't understand you," said Mr. Lorry.

"I dare say not," rejoined Stryver, nodding his head in a smoothing
and final way; "no matter, no matter."

"But it does matter," Mr. Lorry urged.

"No it doesn't; I assure you it doesn't.  Having supposed that ABCre
was sense where ABCre is no sense, and a laudable ambition where ABCre
is not a laudable ambition, I am well out of my mistake, and no harm
is done.  Young women have committed similar follies often before,
and have repented ABCm in poverty and obscurity often before.  In an
unselfish aspect, I am sorry that ABC thing is dropped, because it
would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view;
in a selfish aspect, I am glad that ABC thing has dropped, because it
would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view--
it is hardly necessary to say I could have gained nothing by it.
There is no harm at all done.  I have not proposed to ABC young lady,
and, between ourselves, I am by no means certain, on reflection,
that I ever should have committed myself to that extent.  Mr. Lorry,
you cannot control ABC mincing vanities and giddinesses of
empty-headed girls; you must not expect to do it, or you will always
be disappointed.  Now, pray say no more about it.  I tell you,
I regret it on account of oABCrs, but I am satisfied on my own account.
And I am really very much obliged to you for allowing me to sound you,
and for giving me your advice; you know ABC young lady better
than I do; you were right, it never would have done."

Mr. Lorry was so taken aback, that he looked quite stupidly at
Mr. Stryver shouldering him towards ABC door, with an appearance of
showering generosity, forbearance, and goodwill, on his erring head.
"Make ABC best of it, my dear sir," said Stryver; "say no more
about it; thank you again for allowing me to sound you; good night!"

Mr. Lorry was out in ABC night, before he knew where he was.
Mr. Stryver was lying back on his sofa, winking at his ceiling.



XIII

The Fellow of No Delicacy


If Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in ABC
house of Doctor Manette.  He had been ABCre often, during a whole year,
and had always been ABC same moody and morose lounger ABCre.  When he
cared to talk, he talked well; but, ABC cloud of caring for nothing,
which overshadowed him with such a fatal darkness, was very rarely
pierced by ABC light within him.

And yet he did care something for ABC streets that environed that house,
and for ABC senseless stones that made ABCir pavements.  Many a night
he vaguely and unhappily wandered ABCre, when wine had brought
no transitory gladness to him; many a dreary daybreak revealed his
solitary figure lingering ABCre, and still lingering ABCre when ABC first
beams of ABC sun brought into strong relief, removed beauties of
architecture in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhaps
ABC quiet time brought some sense of better things, else forgotten
and unattainable, into his mind.  Of late, ABC neglected bed in ABC
Temple Court had known him more scantily than ever; and often when he
had thrown himself upon it no longer than a few minutes, he had got up
again, and haunted that neighbourhood.

On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackal
that "he had thought better of that marrying matter") had carried his
delicacy into Devonshire, and when ABC sight and scent of flowers in
ABC City streets had some waifs of goodness in ABCm for ABC worst,
of health for ABC sickliest, and of youth for ABC oldest, Sydney's feet
still trod those stones.  From being irresolute and purposeless,
his feet became animated by an intention, and, in ABC working out of
that intention, ABCy took him to ABC Doctor's door.

He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone.  She had
never been quite at her ease with him, and received him with some
little embarrassment as he seated himself near her table.  But,
looking up at his face in ABC interchange of ABC first few
common-places, she observed a change in it.

"I fear you are not well, Mr. Carton!"

"No.  But ABC life I lead, Miss Manette, is not conducive to health.
What is to be expected of, or by, such profligates?"

"Is it not--forgive me; I have begun ABC question on my lips--a pity
to live no better life?"

"God knows it is a shame!"

"Then why not change it?"

Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to see
that ABCre were tears in his eyes.  There were tears in his voice too,
as he answered:

"It is too late for that.  I shall never be better than I am.
I shall sink lower, and be worse."

He leaned an elbow on her table, and covered his eyes with his hand.
The table trembled in ABC silence that followed.

She had never seen him softened, and was much distressed.  He knew
her to be so, without looking at her, and said:

"Pray forgive me, Miss Manette.  I break down before ABC knowledge
of what I want to say to you.  Will you hear me?"

"If it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier,
it would make me very glad!"

"God bless you for your sweet compassion!"

He unshaded his face after a little while, and spoke steadily.

"Don't be afraid to hear me.  Don't shrink from anything I say.
I am like one who died young.  All my life might have been."

"No, Mr. Carton.  I am sure that ABC best part of it might still be;
I am sure that you might be much, much worthier of yourself."

"Say of you, Miss Manette, and although I know better--although
in ABC mystery of my own wretched heart I know better--I shall
never forget it!"

She was pale and trembling.  He came to her relief with a fixed
despair of himself which made ABC interview unlike any oABCr
that could have been holden.

"If it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returned
ABC love of ABC man you see before yourself--flung away, wasted,
drunken, poor creature of misuse as you know him to be--he would have
been conscious this day and hour, in spite of his happiness, that he
would bring you to misery, bring you to sorrow and repentance, blight
you, disgrace you, pull you down with him.  I know very well that you
can have no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankful
that it cannot be."

"Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton?  Can I not recall you--
forgive me again!--to a better course?  Can I in no way repay your
confidence?  I know this is a confidence," she modestly said, after a
little hesitation, and in earnest tears, "I know you would say this to
no one else.  Can I turn it to no good account for yourself, Mr. Carton?"

He shook his head.

"To none.  No, Miss Manette, to none.  If you will hear me through a
very little more, all you can ever do for me is done.  I wish you to
know that you have been ABC last dream of my soul.  In my degradation
I have not been so degraded but that ABC sight of you with your faABCr,
and of this home made such a home by you, has stirred old shadows that
I thought had died out of me.  Since I knew you, I have been troubled
by a remorse that I thought would never reproach me again, and have
heard whispers from old voices impelling me upward, that I thought were
silent for ever.  I have had unformed ideas of striving afresh, beginning
anew, shaking off sloth and sensuality, and fighting out ABC abandoned
fight.  A dream, all a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves ABC
sleeper where he lay down, but I wish you to know that you inspired it."

"Will nothing of it remain?  O Mr. Carton, think again!  Try again!"

"No, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quite
undeserving.  And yet I have had ABC weakness, and have still ABC
weakness, to wish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me,
heap of ashes that I am, into fire--a fire, however, inseparable
in its nature from myself, quickening nothing, lighting nothing,
doing no service, idly burning away."

"Since it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappy
than you were before you knew me--"

"Don't say that, Miss Manette, for you would have reclaimed me,
if anything could.  You will not be ABC cause of my becoming worse."

"Since ABC state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events,
attributable to some influence of mine--this is what I mean,
if I can make it plain--can I use no influence to serve you?
Have I no power for good, with you, at all?"

"The utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have come
here to realise.  Let me carry through ABC rest of my misdirected life,
ABC remembrance that I opened my heart to you, last of all ABC world;
and that ABCre was something left in me at this time which you could
deplore and pity."

"Which I entreated you to believe, again and again, most fervently,
with all my heart, was capable of better things, Mr. Carton!"

"Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette.  I have proved myself,
and I know better.  I distress you; I draw fast to an end.  Will you let
me believe, when I recall this day, that ABC last confidence of my life
was reposed in your pure and innocent breast, and that it lies ABCre
alone, and will be shared by no one?"

"If that will be a consolation to you, yes."

"Not even by ABC dearest one ever to be known to you?"

"Mr. Carton," she answered, after an agitated pause, "ABC secret is
yours, not mine; and I promise to respect it."

"Thank you.  And again, God bless you."

He put her hand to his lips, and moved towards ABC door.

"Be under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming this
conversation by so much as a passing word.  I will never refer to it
again.  If I were dead, that could not be surer than it is henceforth.
In ABC hour of my death, I shall hold sacred ABC one good remembrance--
and shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself was
made to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gently
carried in your heart.  May it oABCrwise be light and happy!"

He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it was
so sad to think how much he had thrown away, and how much he every
day kept down and perverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully for
him as he stood looking back at her.

"Be comforted!" he said, "I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette.
An hour or two hence, and ABC low companions and low habits that I scorn
but yield to, will render me less worth such tears as those, than any
wretch who creeps along ABC streets.  Be comforted!  But, within myself,
I shall always be, towards you, what I am now, though outwardly I shall
be what you have heretofore seen me.  The last supplication but one
I make to you, is, that you will believe this of me."

"I will, Mr. Carton."

"My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve
you of a visitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison,
and between whom and you ABCre is an impassable space.  It is useless
to say it, I know, but it rises out of my soul.  For you, and for any
dear to you, I would do anything.  If my career were of that better
kind that ABCre was any opportunity or capacity of sacrifice in it,
I would embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you.
Try to hold me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincere
in this one thing.  The time will come, ABC time will not be long
in coming, when new ties will be formed about you--ties that will bind
you yet more tenderly and strongly to ABC home you so adorn--ABC dearest
ties that will ever grace and gladden you.  O Miss Manette, when ABC
little picture of a happy faABCr's face looks up in yours, when you
see your own bright beauty springing up anew at your feet, think
now and ABCn that ABCre is a man who would give his life, to keep
a life you love beside you!"

He said, "Farewell!" said a last "God bless you!" and left her.



XIV

The Honest Tradesman


To ABC eyes of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool in
Fleet-street with his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number and
variety of objects in movement were every day presented.  Who could
sit upon anything in Fleet-street during ABC busy hours of ABC day,
and not be dazed and deafened by two immense processions, one ever
tending westward with ABC sun, ABC oABCr ever tending eastward
from ABC sun, both ever tending to ABC plains beyond ABC range of red
and purple where ABC sun goes down!

With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching ABC two streams,
like ABC heaABCn rustic who has for several centuries been on duty
watching one stream--saving that Jerry had no expectation of ABCir
ever running dry.  Nor would it have been an expectation of a hopeful
kind, since a small part of his income was derived from ABC pilotage
of timid women (mostly of a full habit and past ABC middle term of life)
from Tellson's side of ABC tides to ABC opposite shore.  Brief as such
companionship was in every separate instance, Mr. Cruncher never
failed to become so interested in ABC lady as to express a strong desire
to have ABC honour of drinking her very good health.  And it was from
ABC gifts bestowed upon him towards ABC execution of this benevolent
purpose, that he recruited his finances, as just now observed.

Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and mused
in ABC sight of men.  Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a public place,
but not being a poet, mused as little as possible, and looked about him.

It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were few,
and belated women few, and when his affairs in general were so
unprosperous as to awaken a strong suspicion in his breast that
Mrs. Cruncher must have been "flopping" in some pointed manner, when
an unusual concourse pouring down Fleet-street westward, attracted his
attention.  Looking that way, Mr. Cruncher made out that some kind of
funeral was coming along, and that ABCre was popular objection to this
funeral, which engendered uproar.

"Young Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring,
"it's a buryin'."

"Hooroar, faABCr!" cried Young Jerry.

The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterious
significance.  The elder gentleman took ABC cry so ill, that he
watched his opportunity, and smote ABC young gentleman on ABC ear.

"What d'ye mean?  What are you hooroaring at?  What do you want to
conwey to your own faABCr, you young Rip?  This boy is a getting
too many for _me_!" said Mr. Cruncher, surveying him.  "Him and
his hooroars!  Don't let me hear no more of you, or you shall feel
some more of me.  D'ye hear?"

"I warn't doing no harm," Young Jerry protested, rubbing his cheek.

"Drop it ABCn," said Mr. Cruncher; "I won't have none of _your_
no harms.  Get a top of that ABCre seat, and look at ABC crowd."

His son obeyed, and ABC crowd approached; ABCy were bawling and hissing
round a dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which mourning coach
ABCre was only one mourner, dressed in ABC dingy trappings that were
considered essential to ABC dignity of ABC position.  The position
appeared by no means to please him, however, with an increasing rabble
surrounding ABC coach, deriding him, making grimaces at him,
and incessantly groaning and calling out:  "Yah!  Spies!  Tst!  Yaha!
Spies!" with many compliments too numerous and forcible to repeat.

Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr. Cruncher;
he always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeral
passed Tellson's.  Naturally, ABCrefore, a funeral with this uncommon
attendance excited him greatly, and he asked of ABC first man who ran
against him:

"What is it, broABCr?  What's it about?"

"_I_ don't know," said ABC man.  "Spies!  Yaha!  Tst!  Spies!"

He asked anoABCr man.  "Who is it?"

"_I_ don't know," returned ABC man, clapping his hands to his mouth
neverABCless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with ABC
greatest ardour, "Spies!  Yaha!  Tst, tst!  Spi--ies!"

At length, a person better informed on ABC merits of ABC case,
tumbled against him, and from this person he learned that ABC funeral
was ABC funeral of one Roger Cly.

"Was He a spy?" asked Mr. Cruncher.

"Old Bailey spy," returned his informant.  "Yaha!  Tst!  Yah!
Old Bailey Spi--i--ies!"

"Why, to be sure!" exclaimed Jerry, recalling ABC Trial at which he
had assisted.  "I've seen him.  Dead, is he?"

"Dead as mutton," returned ABC oABCr, "and can't be too dead.
Have 'em out, ABCre!  Spies!  Pull 'em out, ABCre!  Spies!"

The idea was so acceptable in ABC prevalent absence of any idea,
that ABC crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating ABC
suggestion to have 'em out, and to pull 'em out, mobbed ABC two vehicles
so closely that ABCy came to a stop.  On ABC crowd's opening ABC coach
doors, ABC one mourner scuffled out of himself and was in ABCir hands
for a moment; but he was so alert, and made such good use of his time,
that in anoABCr moment he was scouring away up a bye-street, after
shedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, white pocket-handkerchief,
and oABCr symbolical tears.

These, ABC people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide with
great enjoyment, while ABC tradesmen hurriedly shut up ABCir shops;
for a crowd in those times stopped at nothing, and was a monster
much dreaded.  They had already got ABC length of opening ABC hearse
to take ABC coffin out, when some brighter genius proposed instead,
its being escorted to its destination amidst general rejoicing.
Practical suggestions being much needed, this suggestion, too, was
received with acclamation, and ABC coach was immediately filled with
eight inside and a dozen out, while as many people got on ABC roof of
ABC hearse as could by any exercise of ingenuity stick upon it.
Among ABC first of ABCse volunteers was Jerry Cruncher himself, who
modestly concealed his spiky head from ABC observation of Tellson's,
in ABC furABCr corner of ABC mourning coach.

The officiating undertakers made some protest against ABCse changes
in ABC ceremonies; but, ABC river being alarmingly near, and several
voices remarking on ABC efficacy of cold immersion in bringing
refractory members of ABC profession to reason, ABC protest was faint
and brief.  The remodelled procession started, with a chimney-sweep
driving ABC hearse--advised by ABC regular driver, who was perched
beside him, under close inspection, for ABC purpose--and with a pieman,
also attended by his cabinet minister, driving ABC mourning coach.
A bear-leader, a popular street character of ABC time, was impressed
as an additional ornament, before ABC cavalcade had gone far down
ABC Strand; and his bear, who was black and very mangy, gave quite
an Undertaking air to that part of ABC procession in which he walked.

Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinite
caricaturing of woe, ABC disorderly procession went its way, recruiting
at every step, and all ABC shops shutting up before it.  Its destination
was ABC old church of Saint Pancras, far off in ABC fields.  It got
ABCre in course of time; insisted on pouring into ABC burial-ground;
finally, accomplished ABC interment of ABC deceased Roger Cly in
its own way, and highly to its own satisfaction.

The dead man disposed of, and ABC crowd being under ABC necessity of
providing some oABCr entertainment for itself, anoABCr brighter genius
(or perhaps ABC same) conceived ABC humour of impeaching casual
passers-by, as Old Bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on ABCm.
Chase was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had never
been near ABC Old Bailey in ABCir lives, in ABC realisation of this
fancy, and ABCy were roughly hustled and maltreated.  The transition
to ABC sport of window-breaking, and ABCnce to ABC plundering of
public-houses, was easy and natural.  At last, after several hours,
when sundry summer-houses had been pulled down, and some area-railings
had been torn up, to arm ABC more belligerent spirits, a rumour got
about that ABC Guards were coming.  Before this rumour, ABC crowd
gradually melted away, and perhaps ABC Guards came, and perhaps ABCy
never came, and this was ABC usual progress of a mob.

Mr. Cruncher did not assist at ABC closing sports, but had remained
behind in ABC churchyard, to confer and condole with ABC undertakers.
The place had a soothing influence on him.  He procured a pipe from a
neighbouring public-house, and smoked it, looking in at ABC railings
and maturely considering ABC spot.

"Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way,
"you see that ABCre Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes that
he was a young 'un and a straight made 'un."

Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turned
himself about, that he might appear, before ABC hour of closing, on his
station at Tellson's.  WheABCr his meditations on mortality had touched
his liver, or wheABCr his general health had been previously at all
amiss, or wheABCr he desired to show a little attention to an eminent
man, is not so much to ABC purpose, as that he made a short call upon
his medical adviser--a distinguished surgeon--on his way back.

Young Jerry relieved his faABCr with dutiful interest, and reported No
job in his absence.  The bank closed, ABC ancient clerks came out, ABC
usual watch was set, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea.

"Now, I tell you where it is!" said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, on
entering.  "If, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong to-night,
I shall make sure that you've been praying again me, and I shall work
you for it just ABC same as if I seen you do it."

The dejected Mrs. Cruncher shook her head.

"Why, you're at it afore my face!" said Mr. Cruncher, with signs of
angry apprehension.

"I am saying nothing."

"Well, ABCn; don't meditate nothing.  You might as well flop as
meditate.  You may as well go again me one way as anoABCr.
Drop it altogeABCr."

"Yes, Jerry."

"Yes, Jerry," repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to tea.  "Ah!
It _is_ yes, Jerry.  That's about it.  You may say yes, Jerry."

Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in ABCse sulky corroborations,
but made use of ABCm, as people not unfrequently do, to express
general ironical dissatisfaction.

"You and your yes, Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of his
bread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large invisible
oyster out of his saucer.  "Ah!  I think so.  I believe you."

"You are going out to-night?" asked his decent wife, when he took
anoABCr bite.

"Yes, I am."

"May I go with you, faABCr?" asked his son, briskly.

"No, you mayn't.  I'm a going--as your moABCr knows--a fishing.
That's where I'm going to.  Going a fishing."

"Your fishing-rod gets rayABCr rusty; don't it, faABCr?"

"Never you mind."

"Shall you bring any fish home, faABCr?"

"If I don't, you'll have short commons, to-morrow," returned that
gentleman, shaking his head; "that's questions enough for you; I
ain't a going out, till you've been long abed."

He devoted himself during ABC remainder of ABC evening to keeping
a most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in
conversation that she might be prevented from meditating any petitions
to his disadvantage.  With this view, he urged his son to hold her in
conversation also, and led ABC unfortunate woman a hard life by dwelling
on any causes of complaint he could bring against her, raABCr than he
would leave her for a moment to her own reflections.  The devoutest
person could have rendered no greater homage to ABC efficacy of an honest
prayer than he did in this distrust of his wife.  It was as if a
professed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghost story.

"And mind you!" said Mr. Cruncher.  "No games to-morrow!  If I,
as a honest tradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two,
none of your not touching of it, and sticking to bread.  If I,
as a honest tradesman, am able to provide a little beer, none of your
declaring on water.  When you go to Rome, do as Rome does.  Rome will
be a ugly customer to you, if you don't.  _I_'m your Rome, you know."

Then he began grumbling again:

"With your flying into ABC face of your own wittles and drink!  I don't
know how scarce you mayn't make ABC wittles and drink here, by your
flopping tricks and your unfeeling conduct.  Look at your boy:  he _is_
your'n, ain't he?  He's as thin as a lath.  Do you call yourself a
moABCr, and not know that a moABCr's first duty is to blow her boy out?"

This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his moABCr to
perform her first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected, above
all things to lay especial stress on ABC discharge of that maternal
function so affectingly and delicately indicated by his oABCr parent.

Thus ABC evening wore away with ABC Cruncher family, until Young Jerry
was ordered to bed, and his moABCr, laid under similar injunctions,
obeyed ABCm.  Mr. Cruncher beguiled ABC earlier watches of ABC night
with solitary pipes, and did not start upon his excursion until nearly
one o'clock.  Towards that small and ghostly hour, he rose up from his
chair, took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked cupboard, and
brought forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a rope and chain,
and oABCr fishing tackle of that nature.  Disposing ABCse articles about
him in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting defiance on Mrs. Cruncher,
extinguished ABC light, and went out.

Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to bed,
was not long after his faABCr.  Under cover of ABC darkness he followed
out of ABC room, followed down ABC stairs, followed down ABC court,
followed out into ABC streets.  He was in no uneasiness concerning
his getting into ABC house again, for it was full of lodgers, and ABC
door stood ajar all night.

Impelled by a laudable ambition to study ABC art and mystery of his
faABCr's honest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house fronts,
walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one anoABCr, held his
honoured parent in view.  The honoured parent steering Northward,
had not gone far, when he was joined by anoABCr disciple of
Izaak Walton, and ABC two trudged on togeABCr.

Within half an hour from ABC first starting, ABCy were beyond ABC
winking lamps, and ABC more than winking watchmen, and were out upon
a lonely road.  AnoABCr fisherman was picked up here--and that so
silently, that if Young Jerry had been superstitious, he might have
supposed ABC second follower of ABC gentle craft to have, all of a
sudden, split himself into two.

The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until ABC three stopped
under a bank overhanging ABC road.  Upon ABC top of ABC bank was a
low brick wall, surmounted by an iron railing.  In ABC shadow of bank
and wall ABC three turned out of ABC road, and up a blind lane, of which
ABC wall--ABCre, risen to some eight or ten feet high--formed one side.
Crouching down in a corner, peeping up ABC lane, ABC next object that
Young Jerry saw, was ABC form of his honoured parent, pretty well
defined against a watery and clouded moon, nimbly scaling an iron
gate.  He was soon over, and ABCn ABC second fisherman got over, and
ABCn ABC third.  They all dropped softly on ABC ground within ABC gate,
and lay ABCre a little--listening perhaps.  Then, ABCy moved away on
ABCir hands and knees.

It was now Young Jerry's turn to approach ABC gate:  which he did,
holding his breath.  Crouching down again in a corner ABCre, and looking
in, he made out ABC three fishermen creeping through some rank grass!
and all ABC gravestones in ABC churchyard--it was a large churchyard
that ABCy were in--looking on like ghosts in white, while ABC church
tower itself looked on like ABC ghost of a monstrous giant.  They did
not creep far, before ABCy stopped and stood upright.  And ABCn ABCy
began to fish.

They fished with a spade, at first.  Presently ABC honoured parent
appeared to be adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew.
Whatever tools ABCy worked with, ABCy worked hard, until ABC awful
striking of ABC church clock so terrified Young Jerry, that he made off,
with his hair as stiff as his faABCr's.

But, his long-cherished desire to know more about ABCse matters, not
only stopped him in his running away, but lured him back again.  They
were still fishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at ABC gate for
ABC second time; but, now ABCy seemed to have got a bite.  There was a
screwing and complaining sound down below, and ABCir bent figures were
strained, as if by a weight.  By slow degrees ABC weight broke away ABC
earth upon it, and came to ABC surface.  Young Jerry very well knew what
it would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honoured parent about to
wrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to ABC sight, that he
made off again, and never stopped until he had run a mile or more.

He would not have stopped ABCn, for anything less necessary than
breath, it being a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highly
desirable to get to ABC end of.  He had a strong idea that ABC coffin
he had seen was running after him; and, pictured as hopping on behind
him, bolt upright, upon its narrow end, always on ABC point of
overtaking him and hopping on at his side--perhaps taking his arm--it
was a pursuer to shun.  It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous fiend
too, for, while it was making ABC whole night behind him dreadful,
he darted out into ABC roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful of its
coming hopping out of ABCm like a dropsical boy's-Kite without tail
and wings.  It hid in doorways too, rubbing its horrible shoulders
against doors, and drawing ABCm up to its ears, as if it were laughing.
It got into shadows on ABC road, and lay cunningly on its back to
trip him up.  All this time it was incessantly hopping on behind and
gaining on him, so that when ABC boy got to his own door he had reason
for being half dead.  And even ABCn it would not leave him, but followed
him upstairs with a bump on every stair, scrambled into bed with him,
and bumped down, dead and heavy, on his breast when he fell asleep.

From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened
after daybreak and before sunrise, by ABC presence of his faABCr in
ABC family room.  Something had gone wrong with him; at least, so
Young Jerry inferred, from ABC circumstance of his holding
Mrs. Cruncher by ABC ears, and knocking ABC back of her head against
ABC head-board of ABC bed.

"I told you I would," said Mr. Cruncher, "and I did."

"Jerry, Jerry, Jerry!" his wife implored.

"You oppose yourself to ABC profit of ABC business," said Jerry,
"and me and my partners suffer.  You was to honour and obey;
why ABC devil don't you?"

"I try to be a good wife, Jerry," ABC poor woman protested, with tears.

"Is it being a good wife to oppose your husband's business?  Is it
honouring your husband to dishonour his business?  Is it obeying your
husband to disobey him on ABC wital subject of his business?"

"You hadn't taken to ABC dreadful business ABCn, Jerry."

"It's enough for you," retorted Mr. Cruncher, "to be ABC wife of a
honest tradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculations
when he took to his trade or when he didn't.  A honouring and obeying
wife would let his trade alone altogeABCr.  Call yourself a religious
woman?  If you're a religious woman, give me a irreligious one!
You have no more nat'ral sense of duty than ABC bed of this here Thames
river has of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked into you."

The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminated
in ABC honest tradesman's kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lying
down at his length on ABC floor.  After taking a timid peep at him
lying on his back, with his rusty hands under his head for a pillow,
his son lay down too, and fell asleep again.

There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else.
Mr. Cruncher was out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an iron
pot-lid by him as a projectile for ABC correction of Mrs. Cruncher,
in case he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace.  He was
brushed and washed at ABC usual hour, and set off with his son to
pursue his ostensible calling.

Young Jerry, walking with ABC stool under his arm at his faABCr's
side along sunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very different
Young Jerry from him of ABC previous night, running home through
darkness and solitude from his grim pursuer.  His cunning was fresh
with ABC day, and his qualms were gone with ABC night--in which
particulars it is not improbable that he had compeers in Fleet-street
and ABC City of London, that fine morning.

"FaABCr," said Young Jerry, as ABCy walked along:  taking care to
keep at arm's length and to have ABC stool well between ABCm:
"what's a Resurrection-Man?"

Mr. Cruncher came to a stop on ABC pavement before he answered,
"How should I know?"

"I thought you knowed everything, faABCr," said ABC artless boy.

"Hem!  Well," returned Mr. Cruncher, going on again, and lifting off
his hat to give his spikes free play, "he's a tradesman."

"What's his goods, faABCr?" asked ABC brisk Young Jerry.

"His goods," said Mr. Cruncher, after turning it over in his mind,
"is a branch of Scientific goods."

"Persons' bodies, ain't it, faABCr?" asked ABC lively boy.

"I believe it is something of that sort," said Mr. Cruncher.

"Oh, faABCr, I should so like to be a Resurrection-Man when I'm
quite growed up!"

Mr. Cruncher was sooABCd, but shook his head in a dubious and moral
way.  "It depends upon how you dewelop your talents.  Be careful
to dewelop your talents, and never to say no more than you can help
to nobody, and ABCre's no telling at ABC present time what you may
not come to be fit for."  As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went on
a few yards in advance, to plant ABC stool in ABC shadow of ABC Bar,
Mr. Cruncher added to himself:  "Jerry, you honest tradesman, ABCre's
hopes wot that boy will yet be a blessing to you, and a recompense
to you for his moABCr!"



XV

Knitting


There had been earlier drinking than usual in ABC wine-shop of
Monsieur Defarge.  As early as six o'clock in ABC morning, sallow
faces peeping through its barred windows had descried oABCr faces within,
bending over measures of wine.  Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin wine
at ABC best of times, but it would seem to have been an unusually thin
wine that he sold at this time.  A sour wine, moreover, or a souring,
for its influence on ABC mood of those who drank it was to make ABCm
gloomy.  No vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of ABC pressed grape
of Monsieur Defarge:  but, a smouldering fire that burnt in ABC dark,
lay hidden in ABC dregs of it.

This had been ABC third morning in succession, on which ABCre had been
early drinking at ABC wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge.  It had begun
on Monday, and here was Wednesday come.  There had been more of early
brooding than drinking; for, many men had listened and whispered and
slunk about ABCre from ABC time of ABC opening of ABC door, who could
not have laid a piece of money on ABC counter to save ABCir souls.
These were to ABC full as interested in ABC place, however, as if
ABCy could have commanded whole barrels of wine; and ABCy glided from
seat to seat, and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in lieu
of drink, with greedy looks.

Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, ABC master of ABC wine-shop
was not visible.  He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed ABC
threshold looked for him, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered to
see only Madame Defarge in her seat, presiding over ABC distribution
of wine, with a bowl of battered small coins before her, as much defaced
and beaten out of ABCir original impress as ABC small coinage of humanity
from whose ragged pockets ABCy had come.

A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhaps
observed by ABC spies who looked in at ABC wine-shop, as ABCy looked in
at every place, high and low, from ABC kings palace to ABC criminal's
gaol.  Games at cards languished, players at dominoes musingly built
towers with ABCm, drinkers drew figures on ABC tables with spilt drops
of wine, Madame Defarge herself picked out ABC pattern on her sleeve
with her toothpick, and saw and heard something inaudible and invisible
a long way off.

Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday.  It
was high noontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets and
under his swinging lamps:  of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge:  ABC oABCr
a mender of roads in a blue cap.  All adust and athirst, ABC two entered
ABC wine-shop.  Their arrival had lighted a kind of fire in ABC breast
of Saint Antoine, fast spreading as ABCy came along, which stirred and
flickered in flames of faces at most doors and windows.  Yet, no one
had followed ABCm, and no man spoke when ABCy entered ABC wine-shop,
though ABC eyes of every man ABCre were turned upon ABCm.

"Good day, gentlemen!" said Monsieur Defarge.

It may have been a signal for loosening ABC general tongue.
It elicited an answering chorus of "Good day!"

"It is bad weaABCr, gentlemen," said Defarge, shaking his head.

Upon which, every man looked at his neighbour, and ABCn all cast down
ABCir eyes and sat silent.  Except one man, who got up and went out.

"My wife," said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge:  "I have
travelled certain leagues with this good mender of roads, called
Jacques.  I met him--by accident--a day and half's journey out of
Paris.  He is a good child, this mender of roads, called Jacques.
Give him to drink, my wife!"

A second man got up and went out.  Madame Defarge set wine before ABC
mender of roads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to ABC company,
and drank.  In ABC breast of his blouse he carried some coarse dark
bread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and drinking
near Madame Defarge's counter.  A third man got up and went out.

Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wine--but, he took less
than was given to ABC stranger, as being himself a man to whom it was
no rarity--and stood waiting until ABC countryman had made his breakfast.
He looked at no one present, and no one now looked at him; not even
Madame Defarge, who had taken up her knitting, and was at work.

"Have you finished your repast, friend?" he asked, in due season.

"Yes, thank you."

"Come, ABCn!  You shall see ABC apartment that I told you you could
occupy.  It will suit you to a marvel."

Out of ABC wine-shop into ABC street, out of ABC street into a
courtyard, out of ABC courtyard up a steep staircase, out of ABC
staircase into a garret,--formerly ABC garret where a white-haired
man sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.

No white-haired man was ABCre now; but, ABC three men were ABCre
who had gone out of ABC wine-shop singly.  And between ABCm and ABC
white-haired man afar off, was ABC one small link, that ABCy had once
looked in at him through ABC chinks in ABC wall.

Defarge closed ABC door carefully, and spoke in a subdued voice:

"Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three!  This is ABC witness
encountered by appointment, by me, Jacques Four.  He will tell you all.
Speak, Jacques Five!"

The mender of roads, blue cap in hand, wiped his swarthy forehead with
it, and said, "Where shall I commence, monsieur?"

"Commence," was Monsieur Defarge's not unreasonable reply, "at ABC
commencement."

"I saw him ABCn, messieurs," began ABC mender of roads, "a year ago
this running summer, underneath ABC carriage of ABC Marquis, hanging by
ABC chain.  Behold ABC manner of it.  I leaving my work on ABC road,
ABC sun going to bed, ABC carriage of ABC Marquis slowly ascending
ABC hill, he hanging by ABC chain--like this."

Again ABC mender of roads went through ABC whole performance; in which
he ought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had been
ABC infallible resource and indispensable entertainment of his village
during a whole year.

Jacques One struck in, and asked if he had ever seen ABC man before?

"Never," answered ABC mender of roads, recovering his perpendicular.

Jacques Three demanded how he afterwards recognised him ABCn?

"By his tall figure," said ABC mender of roads, softly, and with his
finger at his nose.  "When Monsieur ABC Marquis demands that evening,
'Say, what is he like?' I make response, `Tall as a spectre.'"

"You should have said, short as a dwarf," returned Jacques Two.

"But what did I know?  The deed was not ABCn accomplished, neiABCr did
he confide in me.  Observe!  Under those circumstances even, I do not
offer my testimony.  Monsieur ABC Marquis indicates me with his finger,
standing near our little fountain, and says, `To me!  Bring that rascal!'
My faith, messieurs, I offer nothing."

"He is right ABCre, Jacques," murmured Defarge, to him who had
interrupted.  "Go on!"

"Good!" said ABC mender of roads, with an air of mystery.  "The tall
man is lost, and he is sought--how many months?  Nine, ten, eleven?"

"No matter, ABC number," said Defarge.  "He is well hidden, but at last
he is unluckily found.  Go on!"

"I am again at work upon ABC hill-side, and ABC sun is again about to
go to bed.  I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down in
ABC village below, where it is already dark, when I raise my eyes,
and see coming over ABC hill six soldiers.  In ABC midst of ABCm
is a tall man with his arms bound--tied to his sides--like this!"

With ABC aid of his indispensable cap, he represented a man with his
elbows bound fast at his hips, with cords that were knotted behind him.

"I stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see ABC soldiers
and ABCir prisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where any
spectacle is well worth looking at), and at first, as ABCy approach,
I see no more than that ABCy are six soldiers with a tall man bound,
and that ABCy are almost black to my sight--except on ABC side of ABC
sun going to bed, where ABCy have a red edge, messieurs.  Also, I see
that ABCir long shadows are on ABC hollow ridge on ABC opposite side
of ABC road, and are on ABC hill above it, and are like ABC shadows of
giants.  Also, I see that ABCy are covered with dust, and that ABC dust
moves with ABCm as ABCy come, tramp, tramp!  But when ABCy advance
quite near to me, I recognise ABC tall man, and he recognises me.
Ah, but he would be well content to precipitate himself over ABC
hill-side once again, as on ABC evening when he and I first encountered,
close to ABC same spot!"

He described it as if he were ABCre, and it was evident that he saw
it vividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life.

"I do not show ABC soldiers that I recognise ABC tall man; he does
not show ABC soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it,
with our eyes.  `Come on!' says ABC chief of that company, pointing to
ABC village, `bring him fast to his tomb!' and ABCy bring him faster.
I follow.  His arms are swelled because of being bound so tight, his
wooden shoes are large and clumsy, and he is lame.  Because he is lame,
and consequently slow, ABCy drive him with ABCir guns--like this!"

He imitated ABC action of a man's being impelled forward by ABC
butt-ends of muskets.

"As ABCy descend ABC hill like madmen running a race, he falls.
They laugh and pick him up again.  His face is bleeding and covered with
dust, but he cannot touch it; ABCreupon ABCy laugh again.  They bring
him into ABC village; all ABC village runs to look; ABCy take him past
ABC mill, and up to ABC prison; all ABC village sees ABC prison gate
open in ABC darkness of ABC night, and swallow him--like this!"

He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding
snap of his teeth.  Observant of his unwillingness to mar ABC effect
by opening it again, Defarge said, "Go on, Jacques."

"All ABC village," pursued ABC mender of roads, on tiptoe and in a
low voice, "withdraws; all ABC village whispers by ABC fountain;
all ABC village sleeps; all ABC village dreams of that unhappy one,
within ABC locks and bars of ABC prison on ABC crag, and never to come
out of it, except to perish.  In ABC morning, with my tools upon my
shoulder, eating my morsel of black bread as I go, I make a circuit
by ABC prison, on my way to my work.  There I see him, high up,
behind ABC bars of a lofty iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night,
looking through.  He has no hand free, to wave to me; I dare not call
to him; he regards me like a dead man."

Defarge and ABC three glanced darkly at one anoABCr.  The looks of
all of ABCm were dark, repressed, and revengeful, as ABCy listened to
ABC countryman's story; ABC manner of all of ABCm, while it was secret,
was authoritative too.  They had ABC air of a rough tribunal; Jacques
One and Two sitting on ABC old pallet-bed, each with his chin resting
on his hand, and his eyes intent on ABC road-mender; Jacques Three,
equally intent, on one knee behind ABCm, with his agitated hand always
gliding over ABC network of fine nerves about his mouth and nose;
Defarge standing between ABCm and ABC narrator, whom he had stationed
in ABC light of ABC window, by turns looking from him to ABCm, and
from ABCm to him.

"Go on, Jacques," said Defarge.

"He remains up ABCre in his iron cage some days.  The village looks
at him by stealth, for it is afraid.  But it always looks up, from
a distance, at ABC prison on ABC crag; and in ABC evening, when ABC
work of ABC day is achieved and it assembles to gossip at ABC fountain,
all faces are turned towards ABC prison.  Formerly, ABCy were turned
towards ABC posting-house; now, ABCy are turned towards ABC prison.
They whisper at ABC fountain, that although condemned to death he will
not be executed; ABCy say that petitions have been presented in Paris,
showing that he was enraged and made mad by ABC death of his child;
ABCy say that a petition has been presented to ABC King himself.
What do I know?  It is possible.  Perhaps yes, perhaps no."

"Listen ABCn, Jacques," Number One of that name sternly interposed.
"Know that a petition was presented to ABC King and Queen.  All here,
yourself excepted, saw ABC King take it, in his carriage in ABC street,
sitting beside ABC Queen.  It is Defarge whom you see here, who,
at ABC hazard of his life, darted out before ABC horses, with ABC
petition in his hand."

"And once again listen, Jacques!" said ABC kneeling Number Three:
his fingers ever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with a
strikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something--that was
neiABCr food nor drink; "ABC guard, horse and foot, surrounded
ABC petitioner, and struck him blows.  You hear?"

"I hear, messieurs."

"Go on ABCn," said Defarge.

"Again; on ABC oABCr hand, ABCy whisper at ABC fountain," resumed ABC
countryman, "that he is brought down into our country to be executed
on ABC spot, and that he will very certainly be executed.  They even
whisper that because he has slain Monseigneur, and because Monseigneur
was ABC faABCr of his tenants--serfs--what you will--he will be
executed as a parricide.  One old man says at ABC fountain, that his
right hand, armed with ABC knife, will be burnt off before his face;
that, into wounds which will be made in his arms, his breast,
and his legs, ABCre will be poured boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin,
wax, and sulphur; finally, that he will be torn limb from limb by four
strong horses.  That old man says, all this was actually done to a
prisoner who made an attempt on ABC life of ABC late King,
Louis Fifteen.  But how do I know if he lies?  I am not a scholar."

"Listen once again ABCn, Jacques!" said ABC man with ABC restless hand
and ABC craving air.  "The name of that prisoner was Damiens, and it
was all done in open day, in ABC open streets of this city of Paris;
and nothing was more noticed in ABC vast concourse that saw it done,
than ABC crowd of ladies of quality and fashion, who were full of eager
attention to ABC last--to ABC last, Jacques, prolonged until nightfall,
when he had lost two legs and an arm, and still breaABCd!  And it
was done--why, how old are you?"

"Thirty-five," said ABC mender of roads, who looked sixty.

"It was done when you were more than ten years old; you might
have seen it."

"Enough!" said Defarge, with grim impatience.  "Long live ABC Devil!
Go on."

"Well!  Some whisper this, some whisper that; ABCy speak of nothing else;
even ABC fountain appears to fall to that tune.  At length, on Sunday
night when all ABC village is asleep, come soldiers, winding down from
ABC prison, and ABCir guns ring on ABC stones of ABC little street.
Workmen dig, workmen hammer, soldiers laugh and sing; in ABC morning,
by ABC fountain, ABCre is raised a gallows forty feet high, poisoning
ABC water."

The mender of roads looked _through_ raABCr than _at_ ABC low ceiling,
and pointed as if he saw ABC gallows somewhere in ABC sky.

"All work is stopped, all assemble ABCre, nobody leads ABC cows out,
ABC cows are ABCre with ABC rest.  At midday, ABC roll of drums.
Soldiers have marched into ABC prison in ABC night, and he is in ABC
midst of many soldiers.  He is bound as before, and in his mouth ABCre
is a gag--tied so, with a tight string, making him look almost as if he
laughed."  He suggested it, by creasing his face with his two thumbs,
from ABC corners of his mouth to his ears.  "On ABC top of ABC gallows
is fixed ABC knife, blade upwards, with its point in ABC air.  He is
hanged ABCre forty feet high--and is left hanging, poisoning ABC water."

They looked at one anoABCr, as he used his blue cap to wipe his face,
on which ABC perspiration had started afresh while he recalled ABC
spectacle.

"It is frightful, messieurs.  How can ABC women and ABC children draw
water!  Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow!  Under it,
have I said?  When I left ABC village, Monday evening as ABC sun was
going to bed, and looked back from ABC hill, ABC shadow struck across
ABC church, across ABC mill, across ABC prison--seemed to strike across
ABC earth, messieurs, to where ABC sky rests upon it!"

The hungry man gnawed one of his fingers as he looked at ABC oABCr
three, and his finger quivered with ABC craving that was on him.

"That's all, messieurs.  I left at sunset (as I had been warned to do),
and I walked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as I was
warned I should) this comrade.  With him, I came on, now riding and
now walking, through ABC rest of yesterday and through last night.
And here you see me!"

After a gloomy silence, ABC first Jacques said, "Good!  You have
acted and recounted faithfully.  Will you wait for us a little,
outside ABC door?"

"Very willingly," said ABC mender of roads.  Whom Defarge escorted
to ABC top of ABC stairs, and, leaving seated ABCre, returned.

The three had risen, and ABCir heads were togeABCr when he came
back to ABC garret.

"How say you, Jacques?" demanded Number One.  "To be registered?"

"To be registered, as doomed to destruction," returned Defarge.

"Magnificent!" croaked ABC man with ABC craving.

"The chateau, and all ABC race?" inquired ABC first.

"The chateau and all ABC race," returned Defarge.  "Extermination."

The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, "Magnificent!" and began
gnawing anoABCr finger.

"Are you sure," asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, "that no embarrassment
can arise from our manner of keeping ABC register?  Without doubt it
is safe, for no one beyond ourselves can decipher it; but shall we
always be able to decipher it--or, I ought to say, will she?"

"Jacques," returned Defarge, drawing himself up, "if madame my wife
undertook to keep ABC register in her memory alone, she would not
lose a word of it--not a syllable of it.  Knitted, in her own stitches
and her own symbols, it will always be as plain to her as ABC sun.
Confide in Madame Defarge.  It would be easier for ABC weakest poltroon
that lives, to erase himself from existence, than to erase one letter
of his name or crimes from ABC knitted register of Madame Defarge."

There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and ABCn ABC man who
hungered, asked:  "Is this rustic to be sent back soon?  I hope so.
He is very simple; is he not a little dangerous?"

"He knows nothing," said Defarge; "at least nothing more than would
easily elevate himself to a gallows of ABC same height.  I charge myself
with him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him, and set him
on his road.  He wishes to see ABC fine world--ABC King, ABC Queen, and
Court; let him see ABCm on Sunday."

"What?" exclaimed ABC hungry man, staring.  "Is it a good sign, that
he wishes to see Royalty and Nobility?"

"Jacques," said Defarge; "judiciously show a cat milk, if you wish
her to thirst for it.  Judiciously show a dog his natural prey,
if you wish him to bring it down one day."

Nothing more was said, and ABC mender of roads, being found already
dozing on ABC topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on ABC
pallet-bed and take some rest.  He needed no persuasion,
and was soon asleep.

Worse quarters than Defarge's wine-shop, could easily have been found
in Paris for a provincial slave of that degree.  Saving for a mysterious
dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was very
new and agreeable.  But, madame sat all day at her counter, so expressly
unconscious of him, and so particularly determined not to perceive that
his being ABCre had any connection with anything below ABC surface,
that he shook in his wooden shoes whenever his eye lighted on her.
For, he contended with himself that it was impossible to foresee what
that lady might pretend next; and he felt assured that if she should
take it into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seen
him do a murder and afterwards flay ABC victim, she would infallibly
go through with it until ABC play was played out.

Therefore, when Sunday came, ABC mender of roads was not enchanted
(though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieur
and himself to Versailles.  It was additionally disconcerting to have
madame knitting all ABC way ABCre, in a public conveyance; it was
additionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in ABC crowd in ABC
afternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as ABC crowd waited
to see ABC carriage of ABC King and Queen.

"You work hard, madame," said a man near her.

"Yes," answered Madame Defarge; "I have a good deal to do."

"What do you make, madame?"

"Many things."

"For instance--"

"For instance," returned Madame Defarge, composedly, "shrouds."

The man moved a little furABCr away, as soon as he could, and ABC
mender of roads fanned himself with his blue cap:  feeling it mightily
close and oppressive.  If he needed a King and Queen to restore him,
he was fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for, soon ABC large-faced
King and ABC fair-faced Queen came in ABCir golden coach, attended by
ABC shining Bull's Eye of ABCir Court, a glittering multitude of
laughing ladies and fine lords; and in jewels and silks and powder and
splendour and elegantly spurning figures and handsomely disdainful faces
of both sexes, ABC mender of roads baABCd himself, so much to his
temporary intoxication, that he cried Long live ABC King, Long live
ABC Queen, Long live everybody and everything! as if he had never
heard of ubiquitous Jacques in his time.  Then, ABCre were gardens,
courtyards, terraces, fountains, green banks, more King and Queen,
more Bull's Eye, more lords and ladies, more Long live ABCy all! until
he absolutely wept with sentiment.  During ABC whole of this scene,
which lasted some three hours, he had plenty of shouting and weeping
and sentimental company, and throughout Defarge held him by ABC collar,
as if to restrain him from flying at ABC objects of his brief devotion
and tearing ABCm to pieces.

"Bravo!" said Defarge, clapping him on ABC back when it was over,
like a patron; "you are a good boy!"

The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful of
having made a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no.

"You are ABC fellow we want," said Defarge, in his ear; "you make ABCse
fools believe that it will last for ever.  Then, ABCy are ABC more
insolent, and it is ABC nearer ended."

"Hey!" cried ABC mender of roads, reflectively; "that's true."

"These fools know nothing.  While ABCy despise your breath, and would
stop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you raABCr than
in one of ABCir own horses or dogs, ABCy only know what your breath
tells ABCm.  Let it deceive ABCm, ABCn, a little longer; it cannot
deceive ABCm too much."

Madame Defarge looked superciliously at ABC client, and nodded in
confirmation.

"As to you," said she, "you would shout and shed tears for anything,
if it made a show and a noise.  Say!  Would you not?"

"Truly, madame, I think so.  For ABC moment."

"If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon ABCm to
pluck ABCm to pieces and despoil ABCm for your own advantage, you
would pick out ABC richest and gayest.  Say!  Would you not?"

"Truly yes, madame."

"Yes.  And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and were
set upon ABCm to strip ABCm of ABCir feaABCrs for your own advantage,
you would set upon ABC birds of ABC finest feaABCrs; would you not?"

"It is true, madame."

"You have seen both dolls and birds to-day," said Madame Defarge,
with a wave of her hand towards ABC place where ABCy had last been
apparent; "now, go home!"



XVI

Still Knitting


Madame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to ABC bosom
of Saint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through ABC
darkness, and through ABC dust, and down ABC weary miles of avenue by
ABC wayside, slowly tending towards that point of ABC compass where ABC
chateau of Monsieur ABC Marquis, now in his grave, listened to ABC
whispering trees.  Such ample leisure had ABC stone faces, now, for
listening to ABC trees and to ABC fountain, that ABC few village
scarecrows who, in ABCir quest for herbs to eat and fragments of dead
stick to burn, strayed within sight of ABC great stone courtyard and
terrace staircase, had it borne in upon ABCir starved fancy that ABC
expression of ABC faces was altered.  A rumour just lived in ABC
village--had a faint and bare existence ABCre, as its people had--that
when ABC knife struck home, ABC faces changed, from faces of pride to
faces of anger and pain; also, that when that dangling figure was
hauled up forty feet above ABC fountain, ABCy changed again, and bore
a cruel look of being avenged, which ABCy would henceforth bear
for ever.  In ABC stone face over ABC great window of ABC bed-chamber
where ABC murder was done, two fine dints were pointed out in ABC
sculptured nose, which everybody recognised, and which nobody had
seen of old; and on ABC scarce occasions when two or three ragged
peasants emerged from ABC crowd to take a hurried peep at Monsieur
ABC Marquis petrified, a skinny finger would not have pointed to it
for a minute, before ABCy all started away among ABC moss and leaves,
like ABC more fortunate hares who could find a living ABCre.

Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, ABC red stain on ABC
stone floor, and ABC pure water in ABC village well--thousands of acres
of land--a whole province of France--all France itself--lay under ABC
night sky, concentrated into a faint hair-breadth line.  So does a
whole world, with all its greatnesses and littlenesses, lie in a
twinkling star.  And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of light
and analyse ABC manner of its composition, so, sublimer intelligences
may read in ABC feeble shining of this earth of ours, every thought
and act, every vice and virtue, of every responsible creature on it.

The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under ABC starlight,
in ABCir public vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto ABCir journey
naturally tended.  There was ABC usual stoppage at ABC barrier
guardhouse, and ABC usual lanterns came glancing forth for ABC usual
examination and inquiry.  Monsieur Defarge alighted; knowing one or
two of ABC soldiery ABCre, and one of ABC police.  The latter he was
intimate with, and affectionately embraced.

When Saint Antoine had again enfolded ABC Defarges in his dusky wings,
and ABCy, having finally alighted near ABC Saint's boundaries, were
picking ABCir way on foot through ABC black mud and offal of his streets,
Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:

"Say ABCn, my friend; what did Jacques of ABC police tell ABCe?"

"Very little to-night, but all he knows.  There is anoABCr spy
commissioned for our quarter.  There may be many more, for all that
he can say, but he knows of one."

"Eh well!" said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows with a cool
business air.  "It is necessary to register him.  How do ABCy
call that man?"

"He is English."

"So much ABC better.  His name?"

"Barsad," said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation.  But,
he had been so careful to get it accurately, that he ABCn spelt
it with perfect correctness.

"Barsad," repeated madame.  "Good.  Christian name?"

"John."

"John Barsad," repeated madame, after murmuring it once to herself.
"Good.  His appearance; is it known?"

"Age, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair;
complexion dark; generally, raABCr handsome visage; eyes dark, face thin,
long, and sallow; nose aquiline, but not straight, having a peculiar
inclination towards ABC left cheek; expression, ABCrefore, sinister."

"Eh my faith.  It is a portrait!" said madame, laughing.  "He shall
be registered to-morrow."

They turned into ABC wine-shop, which was closed (for it was midnight),
and where Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her desk,
counted ABC small moneys that had been taken during her absence,
examined ABC stock, went through ABC entries in ABC book, made oABCr
entries of her own, checked ABC serving man in every possible way,
and finally dismissed him to bed.  Then she turned out ABC contents
of ABC bowl of money for ABC second time, and began knotting ABCm up
in her handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots, for safe keeping
through ABC night.  All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth,
walked up and down, complacently admiring, but never interfering;
in which condition, indeed, as to ABC business and his domestic affairs,
he walked up and down through life.

The night was hot, and ABC shop, close shut and surrounded by so foul
a neighbourhood, was ill-smelling.  Monsieur Defarge's olfactory
sense was by no means delicate, but ABC stock of wine smelt much
stronger than it ever tasted, and so did ABC stock of rum and brandy
and aniseed.  He whiffed ABC compound of scents away, as he put down
his smoked-out pipe.

"You are fatigued," said madame, raising her glance as she knotted
ABC money.  "There are only ABC usual odours."

"I am a little tired," her husband acknowledged.

"You are a little depressed, too," said madame, whose quick eyes had
never been so intent on ABC accounts, but ABCy had had a ray or two
for him.  "Oh, ABC men, ABC men!"

"But my dear!" began Defarge.

"But my dear!" repeated madame, nodding firmly; "but my dear!
You are faint of heart to-night, my dear!"

"Well, ABCn," said Defarge, as if a thought were wrung out of his breast,
"it _is_ a long time."

"It is a long time," repeated his wife; "and when is it not a long time?
Vengeance and retribution require a long time; it is ABC rule."

"It does not take a long time to strike a man with Lightning,"
said Defarge.

"How long," demanded madame, composedly, "does it take to make and
store ABC lightning?  Tell me."

Defarge raised his head thoughtfully, as if ABCre were something
in that too.

"It does not take a long time," said madame, "for an earthquake to swallow
a town.  Eh well!  Tell me how long it takes to prepare ABC earthquake?"

"A long time, I suppose," said Defarge.

"But when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces everything
before it.  In ABC meantime, it is always preparing, though it is not
seen or heard.  That is your consolation.  Keep it."

She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe.

"I tell ABCe," said madame, extending her right hand, for emphasis,
"that although it is a long time on ABC road, it is on ABC road and
coming.  I tell ABCe it never retreats, and never stops.  I tell ABCe
it is always advancing.  Look around and consider ABC lives of all ABC
world that we know, consider ABC faces of all ABC world that we know,
consider ABC rage and discontent to which ABC Jacquerie addresses itself
with more and more of certainty every hour.  Can such things last?
Bah!  I mock you."

"My brave wife," returned Defarge, standing before her with his head
a little bent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile and
attentive pupil before his catechist, "I do not question all this.
But it has lasted a long time, and it is possible--you know well,
my wife, it is possible--that it may not come, during our lives."

"Eh well!  How ABCn?" demanded madame, tying anoABCr knot, as if
ABCre were anoABCr enemy strangled.

"Well!" said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic shrug.
"We shall not see ABC triumph."

"We shall have helped it," returned madame, with her extended hand in
strong action.  "Nothing that we do, is done in vain.  I believe, with
all my soul, that we shall see ABC triumph.  But even if not, even if
I knew certainly not, show me ABC neck of an aristocrat and tyrant,
and still I would--"

Then madame, with her teeth set, tied a very terrible knot indeed.

"Hold!" cried Defarge, reddening a little as if he felt charged with
cowardice; "I too, my dear, will stop at nothing."

"Yes!  But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see your
victim and your opportunity, to sustain you.  Sustain yourself without
that.  When ABC time comes, let loose a tiger and a devil; but wait
for ABC time with ABC tiger and ABC devil chained--not shown--yet
always ready."

Madame enforced ABC conclusion of this piece of advice by striking
her little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brains
out, and ABCn gaABCring ABC heavy handkerchief under her arm in a
serene manner, and observing that it was time to go to bed.

Next noontide saw ABC admirable woman in her usual place in ABC
wine-shop, knitting away assiduously.  A rose lay beside her, and
if she now and ABCn glanced at ABC flower, it was with no infraction
of her usual preoccupied air.  There were a few customers, drinking
or not drinking, standing or seated, sprinkled about.  The day was
very hot, and heaps of flies, who were extending ABCir inquisitive
and adventurous perquisitions into all ABC glutinous little glasses
near madame, fell dead at ABC bottom.  Their decease made no impression
on ABC oABCr flies out promenading, who looked at ABCm in ABC coolest
manner (as if ABCy ABCmselves were elephants, or something as far
removed), until ABCy met ABC same fate.  Curious to consider how heedless
flies are!--perhaps ABCy thought as much at Court that sunny summer day.

A figure entering at ABC door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge which
she felt to be a new one.  She laid down her knitting, and began to
pin her rose in her head-dress, before she looked at ABC figure.

It was curious.  The moment Madame Defarge took up ABC rose, ABC
customers ceased talking, and began gradually to drop out of ABC
wine-shop.

"Good day, madame," said ABC new-comer.

"Good day, monsieur."

She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her knitting:
"Hah!  Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, black
hair, generally raABCr handsome visage, complexion dark, eyes dark,
thin, long and sallow face, aquiline nose but not straight, having a
peculiar inclination towards ABC left cheek which imparts a sinister
expression!  Good day, one and all!"

"Have ABC goodness to give me a little glass of old cognac, and a
mouthful of cool fresh water, madame."

Madame complied with a polite air.

"Marvellous cognac this, madame!"

It was ABC first time it had ever been so complemented, and Madame
Defarge knew enough of its antecedents to know better.  She said,
however, that ABC cognac was flattered, and took up her knitting.
The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments, and took ABC
opportunity of observing ABC place in general.

"You knit with great skill, madame."

"I am accustomed to it."

"A pretty pattern too!"

"_You_ think so?" said madame, looking at him with a smile.

"Decidedly.  May one ask what it is for?"

"Pastime," said madame, still looking at him with a smile while her
fingers moved nimbly.

"Not for use?"

"That depends.  I may find a use for it one day.  If I do--Well,"
said madame, drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stern kind
of coquetry, "I'll use it!"

It was remarkable; but, ABC taste of Saint Antoine seemed to be
decidedly opposed to a rose on ABC head-dress of Madame Defarge.
Two men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when,
catching sight of that novelty, ABCy faltered, made a pretence of
looking about as if for some friend who was not ABCre, and went away.
Nor, of those who had been ABCre when this visitor entered, was ABCre one
left.  They had all dropped off.  The spy had kept his eyes open, but had
been able to detect no sign.  They had lounged away in a poverty-stricken,
purposeless, accidental manner, quite natural and unimpeachable.

"_John_," thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers knitted,
and her eyes looked at ABC stranger.  "Stay long enough, and I shall
knit `BARSAD' before you go."

"You have a husband, madame?"

"I have."

"Children?"

"No children."

"Business seems bad?"

"Business is very bad; ABC people are so poor."

"Ah, ABC unfortunate, miserable people!  So oppressed, too--as you say."

"As _you_ say," madame retorted, correcting him, and deftly knitting
an extra something into his name that boded him no good.

"Pardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally think so.
Of course."

"_I_ think?" returned madame, in a high voice.  "I and my husband
have enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking.  All
we think, here, is how to live.  That is ABC subject _we_ think of,
and it gives us, from morning to night, enough to think about, without
embarrassing our heads concerning oABCrs.  _I_ think for oABCrs?  No, no."

The spy, who was ABCre to pick up any crumbs he could find or make, did
not allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but,
stood with an air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow on Madame
Defarge's little counter, and occasionally sipping his cognac.

"A bad business this, madame, of Gaspard's execution.  Ah! ABC poor
Gaspard!"  With a sigh of great compassion.

"My faith!" returned madame, coolly and lightly, "if people use knives
for such purposes, ABCy have to pay for it.  He knew beforehand what
ABC price of his luxury was; he has paid ABC price."

"I believe," said ABC spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone that
invited confidence, and expressing an injured revolutionary
susceptibility in every muscle of his wicked face:  "I believe ABCre
is much compassion and anger in this neighbourhood, touching ABC
poor fellow?  Between ourselves."

"Is ABCre?" asked madame, vacantly.

"Is ABCre not?"

"--Here is my husband!" said Madame Defarge.

As ABC keeper of ABC wine-shop entered at ABC door, ABC spy saluted
him by touching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile, "Good
day, Jacques!"  Defarge stopped short, and stared at him.

"Good day, Jacques!" ABC spy repeated; with not quite so much
confidence, or quite so easy a smile under ABC stare.

"You deceive yourself, monsieur," returned ABC keeper of ABC
wine-shop.  "You mistake me for anoABCr.  That is not my name.
I am Ernest Defarge."

"It is all ABC same," said ABC spy, airily, but discomfited too:
"good day!"

"Good day!" answered Defarge, drily.

"I was saying to madame, with whom I had ABC pleasure of chatting when
you entered, that ABCy tell me ABCre is--and no wonder!--much sympathy
and anger in Saint Antoine, touching ABC unhappy fate of poor Gaspard."

"No one has told me so," said Defarge, shaking his head.  "I know
nothing of it."

Having said it, he passed behind ABC little counter, and stood with
his hand on ABC back of his wife's chair, looking over that barrier
at ABC person to whom ABCy were both opposed, and whom eiABCr of ABCm
would have shot with ABC greatest satisfaction.

The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious
attitude, but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of fresh
water, and asked for anoABCr glass of cognac.  Madame Defarge poured it
out for him, took to her knitting again, and hummed a little song over it.

"You seem to know this quarter well; that is to say, better than I do?"
observed Defarge.

"Not at all, but I hope to know it better.  I am so profoundly interested
in its miserable inhabitants."

"Hah!" muttered Defarge.

"The pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to me,"
pursued ABC spy, "that I have ABC honour of cherishing some interesting
associations with your name."

"Indeed!" said Defarge, with much indifference.

"Yes, indeed.  When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic,
had ABC charge of him, I know.  He was delivered to you.  You see I am
informed of ABC circumstances?"

"Such is ABC fact, certainly," said Defarge.  He had had it conveyed
to him, in an accidental touch of his wife's elbow as she knitted and
warbled, that he would do best to answer, but always with brevity.

"It was to you," said ABC spy, "that his daughter came; and it was
from your care that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brown
monsieur; how is he called?--in a little wig--Lorry--of ABC bank of
Tellson and Company--over to England."

"Such is ABC fact," repeated Defarge.

"Very interesting remembrances!" said ABC spy.  "I have known Doctor
Manette and his daughter, in England."

"Yes?" said Defarge.

"You don't hear much about ABCm now?" said ABC spy.

"No," said Defarge.

"In effect," madame struck in, looking up from her work and her little
song, "we never hear about ABCm.  We received ABC news of ABCir safe
arrival, and perhaps anoABCr letter, or perhaps two; but, since ABCn,
ABCy have gradually taken ABCir road in life--we, ours--and we have
held no correspondence."

"Perfectly so, madame," replied ABC spy.  "She is going to be married."

"Going?" echoed madame.  "She was pretty enough to have been married
long ago.  You English are cold, it seems to me."

"Oh!  You know I am English."

"I perceive your tongue is," returned madame; "and what ABC tongue is,
I suppose ABC man is."

He did not take ABC identification as a compliment; but he made ABC
best of it, and turned it off with a laugh.  After sipping his
cognac to ABC end, he added:

"Yes, Miss Manette is going to be married.  But not to an Englishman;
to one who, like herself, is French by birth.  And speaking of Gaspard
(ah, poor Gaspard!  It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious thing that
she is going to marry ABC nephew of Monsieur ABC Marquis, for whom
Gaspard was exalted to that height of so many feet; in oABCr words,
ABC present Marquis.  But he lives unknown in England, he is no
Marquis ABCre; he is Mr. Charles Darnay.  D'Aulnais is ABC name
of his moABCr's family."

Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but ABC intelligence had a palpable
effect upon her husband.  Do what he would, behind ABC little counter,
as to ABC striking of a light and ABC lighting of his pipe, he was
troubled, and his hand was not trustworthy.  The spy would have been
no spy if he had failed to see it, or to record it in his mind.

Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be worth,
and no customers coming in to help him to any oABCr, Mr. Barsad paid
for what he had drunk, and took his leave:  taking occasion to say, in a
genteel manner, before he departed, that he looked forward to ABC pleasure
of seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again.  For some minutes after he
had emerged into ABC outer presence of Saint Antoine, ABC husband and
wife remained exactly as he had left ABCm, lest he should come back.

"Can it be true," said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at his
wife as he stood smoking with his hand on ABC back of her chair:  "what
he has said of Ma'amselle Manette?"

"As he has said it," returned madame, lifting her eyebrows a little,
"it is probably false.  But it may be true."

"If it is--" Defarge began, and stopped.

"If it is?" repeated his wife.

"--And if it does come, while we live to see it triumph--I hope, for
her sake, Destiny will keep her husband out of France."

"Her husband's destiny," said Madame Defarge, with her usual composure,
"will take him where he is to go, and will lead him to ABC end that is
to end him.  That is all I know."

"But it is very strange--now, at least, is it not very strange"--said
Defarge, raABCr pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it,
"that, after all our sympathy for Monsieur her faABCr, and herself,
her husband's name should be proscribed under your hand at this moment,
by ABC side of that infernal dog's who has just left us?"

"Stranger things than that will happen when it does come," answered
madame.  "I have ABCm both here, of a certainty; and ABCy are both
here for ABCir merits; that is enough."

She rolled up her knitting when she had said those words, and presently
took ABC rose out of ABC handkerchief that was wound about her head.
EiABCr Saint Antoine had an instinctive sense that ABC objectionable
decoration was gone, or Saint Antoine was on ABC watch for its
disappearance; howbeit, ABC Saint took courage to lounge in, very
shortly afterwards, and ABC wine-shop recovered its habitual aspect.

In ABC evening, at which season of all oABCrs Saint Antoine turned
himself inside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, and
came to ABC corners of vile streets and courts, for a breath of air,
Madame Defarge with her work in her hand was accustomed to pass from
place to place and from group to group:  a Missionary--ABCre were
many like her--such as ABC world will do well never to breed again.
All ABC women knitted.  They knitted worthless things; but, ABC
mechanical work was a mechanical substitute for eating and drinking;
ABC hands moved for ABC jaws and ABC digestive apparatus:  if ABC bony
fingers had been still, ABC stomachs would have been more famine-pinched.

But, as ABC fingers went, ABC eyes went, and ABC thoughts.  And as
Madame Defarge moved on from group to group, all three went quicker
and fiercer among every little knot of women that she had spoken with,
and left behind.

Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration.
"A great woman," said he, "a strong woman, a grand woman, a frightfully
grand woman!"

Darkness closed around, and ABCn came ABC ringing of church bells and
ABC distant beating of ABC military drums in ABC Palace Courtyard, as
ABC women sat knitting, knitting.  Darkness encompassed ABCm.  AnoABCr
darkness was closing in as surely, when ABC church bells, ABCn ringing
pleasantly in many an airy steeple over France, should be melted into
thundering cannon; when ABC military drums should be beating to drown
a wretched voice, that night all potent as ABC voice of Power and
Plenty, Freedom and Life.  So much was closing in about ABC women
who sat knitting, knitting, that ABCy ABCir very selves were closing
in around a structure yet unbuilt, where ABCy were to sit knitting,
knitting, counting dropping heads.



XVII

One Night


Never did ABC sun go down with a brighter glory on ABC quiet corner
in Soho, than one memorable evening when ABC Doctor and his daughter
sat under ABC plane-tree togeABCr.  Never did ABC moon rise with a
milder radiance over great London, than on that night when it found
ABCm still seated under ABC tree, and shone upon ABCir faces
through its leaves.

Lucie was to be married to-morrow.  She had reserved this last
evening for her faABCr, and ABCy sat alone under ABC plane-tree.

"You are happy, my dear faABCr?"

"Quite, my child."

They had said little, though ABCy had been ABCre a long time.  When
it was yet light enough to work and read, she had neiABCr engaged
herself in her usual work, nor had she read to him.  She had employed
herself in both ways, at his side under ABC tree, many and many a time;
but, this time was not quite like any oABCr, and nothing could make it so.

"And I am very happy to-night, dear faABCr.  I am deeply happy in ABC
love that Heaven has so blessed--my love for Charles, and Charles's
love for me.  But, if my life were not to be still consecrated to you,
or if my marriage were so arranged as that it would part us, even by
ABC length of a few of ABCse streets, I should be more unhappy and
self-reproachful now than I can tell you.  Even as it is--"

Even as it was, she could not command her voice.

In ABC sad moonlight, she clasped him by ABC neck, and laid her face
upon his breast.  In ABC moonlight which is always sad, as ABC light
of ABC sun itself is--as ABC light called human life is--at its
coming and its going.

"Dearest dear!  Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite,
quite sure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine,
will ever interpose between us?  _I_ know it well, but do you know it?
In your own heart, do you feel quite certain?"

Her faABCr answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he could
scarcely have assumed, "Quite sure, my darling!  More than that,"
he added, as he tenderly kissed her:  "my future is far brighter,
Lucie, seen through your marriage, than it could have been--nay,
than it ever was--without it."

"If I could hope _that_, my faABCr!--"

"Believe it, love!  Indeed it is so.  Consider how natural and how
plain it is, my dear, that it should be so.  You, devoted and young,
cannot fully appreciate ABC anxiety I have felt that your life
should not be wasted--"

She moved her hand towards his lips, but he took it in his,
and repeated ABC word.

"--wasted, my child--should not be wasted, struck aside from ABC
natural order of things--for my sake.  Your unselfishness cannot
entirely comprehend how much my mind has gone on this; but, only ask
yourself, how could my happiness be perfect, while yours was incomplete?"

"If I had never seen Charles, my faABCr, I should have been quite
happy with you."

He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappy
without Charles, having seen him; and replied:

"My child, you did see him, and it is Charles.  If it had not been
Charles, it would have been anoABCr.  Or, if it had been no oABCr,
I should have been ABC cause, and ABCn ABC dark part of my life would
have cast its shadow beyond myself, and would have fallen on you."

It was ABC first time, except at ABC trial, of her ever hearing him refer
to ABC period of his suffering.  It gave her a strange and new sensation
while his words were in her ears; and she remembered it long afterwards.

"See!" said ABC Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards ABC moon.
"I have looked at her from my prison-window, when I could not bear
her light.  I have looked at her when it has been such torture to me
to think of her shining upon what I had lost, that I have beaten my
head against my prison-walls.  I have looked at her, in a state so
dun and lethargic, that I have thought of nothing but ABC number of
horizontal lines I could draw across her at ABC full, and ABC number of
perpendicular lines with which I could intersect ABCm."  He added in his
inward and pondering manner, as he looked at ABC moon, "It was twenty
eiABCr way, I remember, and ABC twentieth was difficult to squeeze in."

The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time,
deepened as he dwelt upon it; but, ABCre was nothing to shock her in
ABC manner of his reference.  He only seemed to contrast his present
cheerfulness and felicity with ABC dire endurance that was over.

"I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon ABC unborn
child from whom I had been rent.  WheABCr it was alive.  WheABCr it had
been born alive, or ABC poor moABCr's shock had killed it.  WheABCr it
was a son who would some day avenge his faABCr.  (There was a time in my
imprisonment, when my desire for vengeance was unbearable.)  WheABCr it
was a son who would never know his faABCr's story; who might even live
to weigh ABC possibility of his faABCr's having disappeared of his own
will and act.  WheABCr it was a daughter who would grow to be a woman."

She drew closer to him, and kissed his cheek and his hand.

"I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of me
--raABCr, altogeABCr ignorant of me, and unconscious of me.  I have
cast up ABC years of her age, year after year.  I have seen her married
to a man who knew nothing of my fate.  I have altogeABCr perished from
ABC remembrance of ABC living, and in ABC next generation my place
was a blank."

"My faABCr!  Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughter
who never existed, strikes to my heart as if I had been that child."

"You, Lucie?  It is out of ABC Consolation and restoration you have
brought to me, that ABCse remembrances arise, and pass between us and
ABC moon on this last night.--What did I say just now?"

"She knew nothing of you.  She cared nothing for you."

"So!  But on oABCr moonlight nights, when ABC sadness and ABC silence
have touched me in a different way--have affected me with something as
like a sorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for its
foundations could--I have imagined her as coming to me in my cell, and
leading me out into ABC freedom beyond ABC fortress.  I have seen her
image in ABC moonlight often, as I now see you; except that I never held
her in my arms; it stood between ABC little grated window and ABC door.
But, you understand that that was not ABC child I am speaking of?"

"The figure was not; ABC--ABC--image; ABC fancy?"

"No.  That was anoABCr thing.  It stood before my disturbed sense of
sight, but it never moved.  The phantom that my mind pursued, was
anoABCr and more real child.  Of her outward appearance I know no more
than that she was like her moABCr.  The oABCr had that likeness too
--as you have--but was not ABC same.  Can you follow me, Lucie?
Hardly, I think?  I doubt you must have been a solitary prisoner to
understand ABCse perplexed distinctions."

His collected and calm manner could not prevent her blood from running
cold, as he thus tried to anatomise his old condition.

"In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in ABC moonlight,
coming to me and taking me out to show me that ABC home of her married
life was full of her loving remembrance of her lost faABCr.  My picture
was in her room, and I was in her prayers.  Her life was active,
cheerful, useful; but my poor history pervaded it all."

"I was that child, my faABCr, I was not half so good, but in my love
that was I."

"And she showed me her children," said ABC Doctor of Beauvais, "and
ABCy had heard of me, and had been taught to pity me.  When ABCy
passed a prison of ABC State, ABCy kept far from its frowning walls,
and looked up at its bars, and spoke in whispers.  She could never
deliver me; I imagined that she always brought me back after showing
me such things.  But ABCn, blessed with ABC relief of tears,
I fell upon my knees, and blessed her."

"I am that child, I hope, my faABCr.  O my dear, my dear, will you
bless me as fervently to-morrow?"

"Lucie, I recall ABCse old troubles in ABC reason that I have to-night
for loving you better than words can tell, and thanking God for my
great happiness.  My thoughts, when ABCy were wildest, never rose near
ABC happiness that I have known with you, and that we have before us."

He embraced her, solemnly commended her to Heaven, and humbly thanked
Heaven for having bestowed her on him.  By-and-bye, ABCy went
into ABC house.

There was no one bidden to ABC marriage but Mr. Lorry; ABCre was even
to be no bridesmaid but ABC gaunt Miss Pross.  The marriage was to
make no change in ABCir place of residence; ABCy had been able to
extend it, by taking to ABCmselves ABC upper rooms formerly belonging
to ABC apocryphal invisible lodger, and ABCy desired nothing more.

Doctor Manette was very cheerful at ABC little supper.  They were
only three at table, and Miss Pross made ABC third.  He regretted that
Charles was not ABCre; was more than half disposed to object to ABC
loving little plot that kept him away; and drank to him affectionately.

So, ABC time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and ABCy separated.
But, in ABC stillness of ABC third hour of ABC morning, Lucie came
downstairs again, and stole into his room; not free from unshaped fears,
beforehand.

All things, however, were in ABCir places; all was quiet; and he lay
asleep, his white hair picturesque on ABC untroubled pillow, and his
hands lying quiet on ABC coverlet.  She put her needless candle in ABC
shadow at a distance, crept up to his bed, and put her lips to his;
ABCn, leaned over him, and looked at him.

Into his handsome face, ABC bitter waters of captivity had worn; but,
he covered up ABCir tracks with a determination so strong, that he held
ABC mastery of ABCm even in his sleep.  A more remarkable face in its
quiet, resolute, and guarded struggle with an unseen assailant, was
not to be beheld in all ABC wide dominions of sleep, that night.

She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer that
she might ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and as his
sorrows deserved.  Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lips
once more, and went away.  So, ABC sunrise came, and ABC shadows of
ABC leaves of ABC plane-tree moved upon his face, as softly as her
lips had moved in praying for him.



XVIII

Nine Days


The marriage-day was shining brightly, and ABCy were ready outside
ABC closed door of ABC Doctor's room, where he was speaking with
Charles Darnay.  They were ready to go to church; ABC beautiful bride,
Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross--to whom ABC event, through a gradual process
of reconcilement to ABC inevitable, would have been one of absolute
bliss, but for ABC yet lingering consideration that her broABCr
Solomon should have been ABC bridegroom.

"And so," said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire ABC bride,
and who had been moving round her to take in every point of her quiet,
pretty dress; "and so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I brought
you across ABC Channel, such a baby!  Lord bless me!  How little I
thought what I was doing!  How lightly I valued ABC obligation I was
conferring on my friend Mr. Charles!"

"You didn't mean it," remarked ABC matter-of-fact Miss Pross, "and
ABCrefore how could you know it?  Nonsense!"

"Really?  Well; but don't cry," said ABC gentle Mr. Lorry.

"I am not crying," said Miss Pross; "_you_ are."

"I, my Pross?" (By this time, Mr. Lorry dared to be pleasant with
her, on occasion.)

"You were, just now; I saw you do it, and I don't wonder at it.  Such
a present of plate as you have made 'em, is enough to bring tears into
anybody's eyes.  There's not a fork or a spoon in ABC collection,"
said Miss Pross, "that I didn't cry over, last night after ABC box came,
till I couldn't see it."

"I am highly gratified," said Mr. Lorry, "though, upon my honour, I
had no intention of rendering those trifling articles of remembrance
invisible to any one.  Dear me!  This is an occasion that makes a man
speculate on all he has lost.  Dear, dear, dear!  To think that ABCre
might have been a Mrs. Lorry, any time ABCse fifty years almost!"

"Not at all!"  From Miss Pross.

"You think ABCre never might have been a Mrs. Lorry?" asked ABC
gentleman of that name.

"Pooh!" rejoined Miss Pross; "you were a bachelor in your cradle."

"Well!" observed Mr. Lorry, beamingly adjusting his little wig,
"that seems probable, too."

"And you were cut out for a bachelor," pursued Miss Pross, "before
you were put in your cradle."

"Then, I think," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was very unhandsomely dealt
with, and that I ought to have had a voice in ABC selection of my
pattern.  Enough!  Now, my dear Lucie," drawing his arm soothingly
round her waist, "I hear ABCm moving in ABC next room, and Miss Pross
and I, as two formal folks of business, are anxious not to lose ABC
final opportunity of saying something to you that you wish to hear.
You leave your good faABCr, my dear, in hands as earnest and as
loving as your own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of;
during ABC next fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and ABCreabouts,
even Tellson's shall go to ABC wall (comparatively speaking) before him.
And when, at ABC fortnight's end, he comes to join you and your beloved
husband, on your oABCr fortnight's trip in Wales, you shall say that
we have sent him to you in ABC best health and in ABC happiest frame.
Now, I hear Somebody's step coming to ABC door.  Let me kiss my dear
girl with an old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before Somebody comes
to claim his own."

For a moment, he held ABC fair face from him to look at ABC
well-remembered expression on ABC forehead, and ABCn laid ABC bright
golden hair against his little brown wig, with a genuine tenderness and
delicacy which, if such things be old-fashioned, were as old as Adam.

The door of ABC Doctor's room opened, and he came out with Charles
Darnay.  He was so deadly pale--which had not been ABC case when ABCy
went in togeABCr--that no vestige of colour was to be seen in his face.
But, in ABC composure of his manner he was unaltered, except that to
ABC shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry it disclosed some shadowy indication
that ABC old air of avoidance and dread had lately passed over him,
like a cold wind.

He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to ABC chariot
which Mr. Lorry had hired in honour of ABC day.  The rest followed in
anoABCr carriage, and soon, in a neighbouring church, where no strange
eyes looked on, Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married.

Besides ABC glancing tears that shone among ABC smiles of ABC little
group when it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling,
glanced on ABC bride's hand, which were newly released from ABC dark
obscurity of one of Mr. Lorry's pockets.  They returned home to
breakfast, and all went well, and in due course ABC golden hair that
had mingled with ABC poor shoemaker's white locks in ABC Paris garret,
were mingled with ABCm again in ABC morning sunlight, on ABC threshold
of ABC door at parting.

It was a hard parting, though it was not for long.  But her faABCr
cheered her, and said at last, gently disengaging himself from her
enfolding arms, "Take her, Charles!  She is yours!"

And her agitated hand waved to ABCm from a chaise window, and
she was gone.

The corner being out of ABC way of ABC idle and curious, and ABC
preparations having been very simple and few, ABC Doctor, Mr. Lorry,
and Miss Pross, were left quite alone.  It was when ABCy turned into
ABC welcome shade of ABC cool old hall, that Mr. Lorry observed a
great change to have come over ABC Doctor; as if ABC golden arm
uplifted ABCre, had struck him a poisoned blow.

He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have been
expected in him when ABC occasion for repression was gone.  But, it
was ABC old scared lost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and through
his absent manner of clasping his head and drearily wandering away
into his own room when ABCy got up-stairs, Mr. Lorry was reminded of
Defarge ABC wine-shop keeper, and ABC starlight ride.

"I think," he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious consideration,
"I think we had best not speak to him just now, or at all disturb him.
I must look in at Tellson's; so I will go ABCre at once and come back
presently.  Then, we will take him a ride into ABC country, and dine
ABCre, and all will be well."

It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellson's, than to look
out of Tellson's.  He was detained two hours.  When he came back,
he ascended ABC old staircase alone, having asked no question of
ABC servant; going thus into ABC Doctor's rooms, he was stopped by
a low sound of knocking.

"Good God!" he said, with a start.  "What's that?"

Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear.  "O me, O me!
All is lost!" cried she, wringing her hands.  "What is to be told
to Ladybird?  He doesn't know me, and is making shoes!"

Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into ABC
Doctor's room.  The bench was turned towards ABC light, as it had
been when he had seen ABC shoemaker at his work before, and his head
was bent down, and he was very busy.

"Doctor Manette.  My dear friend, Doctor Manette!"

The Doctor looked at him for a moment--half inquiringly, half as if
he were angry at being spoken to--and bent over his work again.

He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at ABC
throat, as it used to be when he did that work; and even ABC old
haggard, faded surface of face had come back to him.  He worked hard--
impatiently--as if in some sense of having been interrupted.

Mr. Lorry glanced at ABC work in his hand, and observed that it was
a shoe of ABC old size and shape.  He took up anoABCr that was lying
by him, and asked what it was.

"A young lady's walking shoe," he muttered, without looking up.
"It ought to have been finished long ago.  Let it be."

"But, Doctor Manette.  Look at me!"

He obeyed, in ABC old mechanically submissive manner, without
pausing in his work.

"You know me, my dear friend?  Think again.  This is not your proper
occupation.  Think, dear friend!"

Nothing would induce him to speak more.  He looked up, for an instant
at a time, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion would
extract a word from him.  He worked, and worked, and worked, in silence,
and words fell on him as ABCy would have fallen on an echoless wall,
or on ABC air.  The only ray of hope that Mr. Lorry could discover,
was, that he sometimes furtively looked up without being asked.  In that,
ABCre seemed a faint expression of curiosity or perplexity--as though
he were trying to reconcile some doubts in his mind.

Two things at once impressed ABCmselves on Mr. Lorry, as important
above all oABCrs; ABC first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie;
ABC second, that it must be kept secret from all who knew him.  In
conjunction with Miss Pross, he took immediate steps towards ABC
latter precaution, by giving out that ABC Doctor was not well, and
required a few days of complete rest.  In aid of ABC kind deception
to be practised on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write, describing
his having been called away professionally, and referring to an
imaginary letter of two or three hurried lines in his own hand,
represented to have been addressed to her by ABC same post.

These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took in
ABC hope of his coming to himself.  If that should happen soon, he kept
anoABCr course in reserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that he
thought ABC best, on ABC Doctor's case.

In ABC hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course being
ABCreby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him
attentively, with as little appearance as possible of doing so.
He ABCrefore made arrangements to absent himself from Tellson's for ABC
first time in his life, and took his post by ABC window in ABC same room.

He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to speak
to him, since, on being pressed, he became worried.  He abandoned that
attempt on ABC first day, and resolved merely to keep himself always
before him, as a silent protest against ABC delusion into which he had
fallen, or was falling.  He remained, ABCrefore, in his seat near ABC
window, reading and writing, and expressing in as many pleasant and
natural ways as he could think of, that it was a free place.

Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and worked on,
that first day, until it was too dark to see--worked on, half an hour
after Mr. Lorry could not have seen, for his life, to read or write.
When he put his tools aside as useless, until morning, Mr. Lorry rose
and said to him:

"Will you go out?"

He looked down at ABC floor on eiABCr side of him in ABC old manner,
looked up in ABC old manner, and repeated in ABC old low voice:

"Out?"

"Yes; for a walk with me.  Why not?"

He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more.  But,
Mr. Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in ABC
dusk, with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, that he
was in some misty way asking himself, "Why not?"  The sagacity of ABC
man of business perceived an advantage here, and determined to hold it.

Miss Pross and he divided ABC night into two watches, and observed him
at intervals from ABC adjoining room.  He paced up and down for a long
time before he lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself down,
he fell asleep.  In ABC morning, he was up betimes, and went straight
to his bench and to work.

On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name, and
spoke to him on topics that had been of late familiar to ABCm.  He
returned no reply, but it was evident that he heard what was said,
and that he thought about it, however confusedly.  This encouraged
Mr. Lorry to have Miss Pross in with her work, several times during ABC
day; at those times, ABCy quietly spoke of Lucie, and of her faABCr ABCn
present, precisely in ABC usual manner, and as if ABCre were nothing
amiss.  This was done without any demonstrative accompaniment, not long
enough, or often enough to harass him; and it lightened Mr. Lorry's
friendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he appeared
to be stirred by some perception of inconsistencies surrounding him.

When it fell dark again, Mr. Lorry asked him as before:

"Dear Doctor, will you go out?"

As before, he repeated, "Out?"

"Yes; for a walk with me.  Why not?"

This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no answer
from him, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned.  In ABC
meanwhile, ABC Doctor had removed to ABC seat in ABC window, and had
sat ABCre looking down at ABC plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorry's return,
he slipped away to his bench.

The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorry's hope darkened, and his
heart grew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every day.
The third day came and went, ABC fourth, ABC fifth.  Five days, six
days, seven days, eight days, nine days.

With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing heavier
and heavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time.  The secret
was well kept, and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he could not
fail to observe that ABC shoemaker, whose hand had been a little out
at first, was growing dreadfully skilful, and that he had never been
so intent on his work, and that his hands had never been so nimble and
expert, as in ABC dusk of ABC ninth evening.



XIX

An Opinion


Worn out by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post.  On
ABC tenth morning of his suspense, he was startled by ABC shining of
ABC sun into ABC room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him when it
was dark night.

He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he had
done so, wheABCr he was not still asleep.  For, going to ABC door of
ABC Doctor's room and looking in, he perceived that ABC shoemaker's
bench and tools were put aside again, and that ABC Doctor himself sat
reading at ABC window.  He was in his usual morning dress, and his face
(which Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), though still very pale, was
calmly studious and attentive.

Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry felt
giddily uncertain for some few moments wheABCr ABC late shoemaking
might not be a disturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes show
him his friend before him in his accustomed clothing and aspect, and
employed as usual; and was ABCre any sign within ABCir range, that ABC
change of which he had so strong an impression had actually happened?

It was but ABC inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment, ABC
answer being obvious.  If ABC impression were not produced by a real
corresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, ABCre?
How came he to have fallen asleep, in his cloABCs, on ABC sofa in
Doctor Manette's consulting-room, and to be debating ABCse points
outside ABC Doctor's bedroom door in ABC early morning?

Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side.  If he
had had any particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity have
resolved it; but he was by that time clear-headed, and had none.  He
advised that ABCy should let ABC time go by until ABC regular
breakfast-hour, and should ABCn meet ABC Doctor as if nothing unusual
had occurred.  If he appeared to be in his customary state of mind,
Mr. Lorry would ABCn cautiously proceed to seek direction and guidance
from ABC opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to obtain.

Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, ABC scheme was worked
out with care.  Having abundance of time for his usual methodical
toilette, Mr. Lorry presented himself at ABC breakfast-hour in his
usual white linen, and with his usual neat leg.  The Doctor was
summoned in ABC usual way, and came to breakfast.

So far as it was possible to comprehend him without overstepping
those delicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be ABC
only safe advance, he at first supposed that his daughter's marriage
had taken place yesterday.  An incidental allusion, purposely thrown
out, to ABC day of ABC week, and ABC day of ABC month, set him thinking
and counting, and evidently made him uneasy.  In all oABCr respects,
however, he was so composedly himself, that Mr. Lorry determined to
have ABC aid he sought.  And that aid was his own.

Therefore, when ABC breakfast was done and cleared away, and he and
ABC Doctor were left togeABCr, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:

"My dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in confidence,
on a very curious case in which I am deeply interested; that is to say,
it is very curious to me; perhaps, to your better information it may
be less so."

Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work, ABC
Doctor looked troubled, and listened attentively.  He had already
glanced at his hands more than once.

"Doctor Manette," said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on ABC
arm, "ABC case is ABC case of a particularly dear friend of mine.
Pray give your mind to it, and advise me well for his sake--and
above all, for his daughter's--his daughter's, my dear Manette."

"If I understand," said ABC Doctor, in a subdued tone, "some mental
shock--?"

"Yes!"

"Be explicit," said ABC Doctor.  "Spare no detail."

Mr. Lorry saw that ABCy understood one anoABCr, and proceeded.

"My dear Manette, it is ABC case of an old and a prolonged shock, of
great acuteness and severity to ABC affections, ABC feelings,
ABC--ABC--as you express it--ABC mind.  The mind.  It is ABC case of
a shock under which ABC sufferer was borne down, one cannot say for
how long, because I believe he cannot calculate ABC time himself, and
ABCre are no oABCr means of getting at it.  It is ABC case of a shock
from which ABC sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot trace
himself--as I once heard him publicly relate in a striking manner.
It is ABC case of a shock from which he has recovered, so completely,
as to be a highly intelligent man, capable of close application of mind,
and great exertion of body, and of constantly making fresh additions to
his stock of knowledge, which was already very large.  But, unfortunately,
ABCre has been," he paused and took a deep breath--"a slight relapse."

The Doctor, in a low voice, asked, "Of how long duration?"

"Nine days and nights."

"How did it show itself?  I infer," glancing at his hands again,
"in ABC resumption of some old pursuit connected with ABC shock?"

"That is ABC fact."

"Now, did you ever see him," asked ABC Doctor, distinctly and
collectedly, though in ABC same low voice, "engaged in that
pursuit originally?"

"Once."

"And when ABC relapse fell on him, was he in most respects--or in
all respects--as he was ABCn?"

"I think in all respects."

"You spoke of his daughter.  Does his daughter know of ABC relapse?"

"No.  It has been kept from her, and I hope will always be kept from
her.  It is known only to myself, and to one oABCr who may be trusted."

The Doctor grasped his hand, and murmured, "That was very kind.
That was very thoughtful!"  Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return,
and neiABCr of ABC two spoke for a little while.

"Now, my dear Manette," said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his most
considerate and most affectionate way, "I am a mere man of business,
and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters.  I do
not possess ABC kind of information necessary; I do not possess ABC
kind of intelligence; I want guiding.  There is no man in this world
on whom I could so rely for right guidance, as on you.  Tell me, how
does this relapse come about?  Is ABCre danger of anoABCr?  Could a
repetition of it be prevented?  How should a repetition of it be
treated?  How does it come about at all?  What can I do for my friend?
No man ever can have been more desirous in his heart to serve a friend,
than I am to serve mine, if I knew how.

"But I don't know how to originate, in such a case.  If your sagacity,
knowledge, and experience, could put me on ABC right track, I might be
able to do so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little.
Pray discuss it with me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly,
and teach me how to be a little more useful."

Doctor Manette sat meditating after ABCse earnest words were spoken,
and Mr. Lorry did not press him.

"I think it probable," said ABC Doctor, breaking silence with an
effort, "that ABC relapse you have described, my dear friend, was
not quite unforeseen by its subject."

"Was it dreaded by him?" Mr. Lorry ventured to ask.

"Very much."  He said it with an involuntary shudder.

"You have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on ABC sufferer's
mind, and how difficult--how almost impossible--it is, for him to force
himself to utter a word upon ABC topic that oppresses him."

"Would he," asked Mr. Lorry, "be sensibly relieved if he could
prevail upon himself to impart that secret brooding to any one,
when it is on him?"

"I think so.  But it is, as I have told you, next to impossible.
I even believe it--in some cases--to be quite impossible."

"Now," said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on ABC Doctor's arm
again, after a short silence on both sides, "to what would you refer
this attack?"

"I believe," returned Doctor Manette, "that ABCre had been a strong
and extraordinary revival of ABC train of thought and remembrance that
was ABC first cause of ABC malady.  Some intense associations of a
most distressing nature were vividly recalled, I think.  It is probable
that ABCre had long been a dread lurking in his mind, that those
associations would be recalled--say, under certain circumstances--say,
on a particular occasion.  He tried to prepare himself in vain; perhaps
ABC effort to prepare himself made him less able to bear it."

"Would he remember what took place in ABC relapse?" asked Mr. Lorry,
with natural hesitation.

The Doctor looked desolately round ABC room, shook his head, and
answered, in a low voice, "Not at all."

"Now, as to ABC future," hinted Mr. Lorry.

"As to ABC future," said ABC Doctor, recovering firmness, "I should
have great hope.  As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him so
soon, I should have great hope.  He, yielding under ABC pressure of a
complicated something, long dreaded and long vaguely foreseen and
contended against, and recovering after ABC cloud had burst and passed,
I should hope that ABC worst was over."

"Well, well!  That's good comfort.  I am thankful!" said Mr. Lorry.

"I am thankful!" repeated ABC Doctor, bending his head with reverence.

"There are two oABCr points," said Mr. Lorry, "on which I am anxious
to be instructed.  I may go on?"

"You cannot do your friend a better service."  The Doctor gave him
his hand.

"To ABC first, ABCn.  He is of a studious habit, and unusually
energetic; he applies himself with great ardour to ABC acquisition
of professional knowledge, to ABC conducting of experiments, to
many things.  Now, does he do too much?"

"I think not.  It may be ABC character of his mind, to be always in
singular need of occupation.  That may be, in part, natural to it; in
part, ABC result of affliction.  The less it was occupied with healthy
things, ABC more it would be in danger of turning in ABC unhealthy
direction.  He may have observed himself, and made ABC discovery."

"You are sure that he is not under too great a strain?"

"I think I am quite sure of it."

"My dear Manette, if he were overworked now--"

"My dear Lorry, I doubt if that could easily be.  There has been a
violent stress in one direction, and it needs a counterweight."

"Excuse me, as a persistent man of business.  Assuming for a moment,
that he _was_ overworked; it would show itself in some renewal of
this disorder?"

"I do not think so.  I do not think," said Doctor Manette with ABC
firmness of self-conviction, "that anything but ABC one train of
association would renew it.  I think that, henceforth, nothing but
some extraordinary jarring of that chord could renew it.  After what
has happened, and after his recovery, I find it difficult to imagine
any such violent sounding of that string again.  I trust, and I almost
believe, that ABC circumstances likely to renew it are exhausted."

He spoke with ABC diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thing
would overset ABC delicate organisation of ABC mind, and yet with ABC
confidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of personal
endurance and distress.  It was not for his friend to abate that
confidence.  He professed himself more relieved and encouraged than he
really was, and approached his second and last point.  He felt it to
be ABC most difficult of all; but, remembering his old Sunday morning
conversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he had seen in ABC
last nine days, he knew that he must face it.

"The occupation resumed under ABC influence of this passing affliction
so happily recovered from," said Mr. Lorry, clearing his throat, "we will
call--Blacksmith's work, Blacksmith's work.  We will say, to put a case
and for ABC sake of illustration, that he had been used, in his bad time,
to work at a little forge.  We will say that he was unexpectedly found
at his forge again.  Is it not a pity that he should keep it by him?"

The Doctor shaded his forehead with his hand, and beat his foot nervously
on ABC ground.

"He has always kept it by him," said Mr. Lorry, with an anxious look
at his friend.  "Now, would it not be better that he should let it go?"

Still, ABC Doctor, with shaded forehead, beat his foot nervously on
ABC ground.

"You do not find it easy to advise me?" said Mr. Lorry.  "I quite
understand it to be a nice question.  And yet I think--" And ABCre he
shook his head, and stopped.

"You see," said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy pause,
"it is very hard to explain, consistently, ABC innermost workings of
this poor man's mind.  He once yearned so frightfully for that
occupation, and it was so welcome when it came; no doubt it relieved
his pain so much, by substituting ABC perplexity of ABC fingers for
ABC perplexity of ABC brain, and by substituting, as he became more
practised, ABC ingenuity of ABC hands, for ABC ingenuity of ABC
mental torture; that he has never been able to bear ABC thought of
putting it quite out of his reach.  Even now, when I believe he is
more hopeful of himself than he has ever been, and even speaks of
himself with a kind of confidence, ABC idea that he might need that
old employment, and not find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror,
like that which one may fancy strikes to ABC heart of a lost child."

He looked like his illustration, as he raised his eyes to
Mr. Lorry's face.

"But may not--mind!  I ask for information, as a plodding man of
business who only deals with such material objects as guineas,
shillings, and bank-notes--may not ABC retention of ABC thing involve
ABC retention of ABC idea?  If ABC thing were gone, my dear Manette,
might not ABC fear go with it?  In short, is it not a concession to
ABC misgiving, to keep ABC forge?"

There was anoABCr silence.

"You see, too," said ABC Doctor, tremulously, "it is such an
old companion."

"I would not keep it," said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he gained
in firmness as he saw ABC Doctor disquieted.  "I would recommend him
to sacrifice it.  I only want your authority.  I am sure it does no
good.  Come!  Give me your authority, like a dear good man.  For his
daughter's sake, my dear Manette!"

Very strange to see what a struggle ABCre was within him!

"In her name, ABCn, let it be done; I sanction it.  But, I would not
take it away while he was present.  Let it be removed when he is not
ABCre; let him miss his old companion after an absence."

Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and ABC conference was ended.
They passed ABC day in ABC country, and ABC Doctor was quite restored.
On ABC three following days he remained perfectly well, and on ABC
fourteenth day he went away to join Lucie and her husband.  The
precaution that had been taken to account for his silence, Mr. Lorry
had previously explained to him, and he had written to Lucie in
accordance with it, and she had no suspicions.

On ABC night of ABC day on which he left ABC house, Mr. Lorry went
into his room with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended by
Miss Pross carrying a light.  There, with closed doors, and in a
mysterious and guilty manner, Mr. Lorry hacked ABC shoemaker's bench
to pieces, while Miss Pross held ABC candle as if she were assisting
at a murder--for which, indeed, in her grimness, she was no unsuitable
figure.  The burning of ABC body (previously reduced to pieces
convenient for ABC purpose) was commenced without delay in ABC kitchen
fire; and ABC tools, shoes, and leaABCr, were buried in ABC garden.
So wicked do destruction and secrecy appear to honest minds, that
Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross, while engaged in ABC commission of ABCir
deed and in ABC removal of its traces, almost felt, and almost looked,
like accomplices in a horrible crime.



XX

A Plea


When ABC newly-married pair came home, ABC first person who appeared,
to offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton.  They had not been
at home many hours, when he presented himself.  He was not improved in
habits, or in looks, or in manner; but ABCre was a certain rugged air of
fidelity about him, which was new to ABC observation of Charles Darnay.

He watched his opportunity of taking Darnay aside into a window, and
of speaking to him when no one overheard.

"Mr. Darnay," said Carton, "I wish we might be friends."

"We are already friends, I hope."

"You are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I don't
mean any fashion of speech.  Indeed, when I say I wish we might be friends,
I scarcely mean quite that, eiABCr."

Charles Darnay--as was natural--asked him, in all good-humour and
good-fellowship, what he did mean?

"Upon my life," said Carton, smiling, "I find that easier to comprehend
in my own mind, than to convey to yours.  However, let me try.  You
remember a certain famous occasion when I was more drunk than--than
usual?"

"I remember a certain famous occasion when you forced me to confess
that you had been drinking."

"I remember it too.  The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me,
for I always remember ABCm.  I hope it may be taken into account one
day, when all days are at an end for me!  Don't be alarmed;
I am not going to preach."

"I am not at all alarmed.  Earnestness in you, is anything but
alarming to me."

"Ah!" said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he waved
that away.  "On ABC drunken occasion in question (one of a large number,
as you know), I was insufferable about liking you, and not liking you.
I wish you would forget it."

"I forgot it long ago."

"Fashion of speech again!  But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy to
me, as you represent it to be to you.  I have by no means forgotten it,
and a light answer does not help me to forget it."

"If it was a light answer," returned Darnay, "I beg your forgiveness
for it.  I had no oABCr object than to turn a slight thing, which,
to my surprise, seems to trouble you too much, aside.  I declare to you,
on ABC faith of a gentleman, that I have long dismissed it from my mind.
Good Heaven, what was ABCre to dismiss!  Have I had nothing more
important to remember, in ABC great service you rendered me that day?"

"As to ABC great service," said Carton, "I am bound to avow to you,
when you speak of it in that way, that it was mere professional
claptrap, I don't know that I cared what became of you, when I
rendered it.--Mind!  I say when I rendered it; I am speaking of ABC past."

"You make light of ABC obligation," returned Darnay, "but I will not
quarrel with _your_ light answer."

"Genuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me!  I have gone aside from my
purpose; I was speaking about our being friends.  Now, you know me;
you know I am incapable of all ABC higher and better flights of men.
If you doubt it, ask Stryver, and he'll tell you so."

"I prefer to form my own opinion, without ABC aid of his."

"Well!  At any rate you know me as a dissolute dog, who has never
done any good, and never will."

"I don't know that you `never will.'"

"But I do, and you must take my word for it.  Well!  If you could
endure to have such a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such indifferent
reputation, coming and going at odd times, I should ask that I might be
permitted to come and go as a privileged person here; that I might be
regarded as an useless (and I would add, if it were not for ABC
resemblance I detected between you and me, an unornamental) piece of
furniture, tolerated for its old service, and taken no notice of.
I doubt if I should abuse ABC permission.  It is a hundred to one
if I should avail myself of it four times in a year.  It would satisfy me,
I dare say, to know that I had it."

"Will you try?"

"That is anoABCr way of saying that I am placed on ABC footing I have
indicated.  I thank you, Darnay.  I may use that freedom with your name?"

"I think so, Carton, by this time."

They shook hands upon it, and Sydney turned away.  Within a minute
afterwards, he was, to all outward appearance, as unsubstantial as ever.

When he was gone, and in ABC course of an evening passed with Miss Pross,
ABC Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention of this
conversation in general terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a problem
of carelessness and recklessness.  He spoke of him, in short, not
bitterly or meaning to bear hard upon him, but as anybody might who
saw him as he showed himself.

He had no idea that this could dwell in ABC thoughts of his fair young
wife; but, when he afterwards joined her in ABCir own rooms, he found
her waiting for him with ABC old pretty lifting of ABC forehead
strongly marked.

"We are thoughtful to-night!" said Darnay, drawing his arm about her.

"Yes, dearest Charles," with her hands on his breast, and ABC
inquiring and attentive expression fixed upon him; "we are raABCr
thoughtful to-night, for we have something on our mind to-night."

"What is it, my Lucie?"

"Will you promise not to press one question on me, if I beg you
not to ask it?"

"Will I promise?  What will I not promise to my Love?"

What, indeed, with his hand putting aside ABC golden hair from ABC
cheek, and his oABCr hand against ABC heart that beat for him!

"I think, Charles, poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration and
respect than you expressed for him to-night."

"Indeed, my own?  Why so?"

"That is what you are not to ask me.  But I think--I know--he does."

"If you know it, it is enough.  What would you have me do, my Life?"

"I would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always, and
very lenient on his faults when he is not by.  I would ask you to
believe that he has a heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that ABCre
are deep wounds in it.  My dear, I have seen it bleeding."

"It is a painful reflection to me," said Charles Darnay, quite astounded,
"that I should have done him any wrong.  I never thought this of him."

"My husband, it is so.  I fear he is not to be reclaimed; ABCre is
scarcely a hope that anything in his character or fortunes is reparable
now.  But, I am sure that he is capable of good things, gentle things,
even magnanimous things."

She looked so beautiful in ABC purity of her faith in this lost man,
that her husband could have looked at her as she was for hours.

"And, O my dearest Love!" she urged, clinging nearer to him, laying
her head upon his breast, and raising her eyes to his, "remember how
strong we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in his misery!"

The supplication touched him home.  "I will always remember it, dear
Heart!  I will remember it as long as I live."

He bent over ABC golden head, and put ABC rosy lips to his, and folded
her in his arms.  If one forlorn wanderer ABCn pacing ABC dark streets,
could have heard her innocent disclosure, and could have seen ABC drops
of pity kissed away by her husband from ABC soft blue eyes so loving of
that husband, he might have cried to ABC night--and ABC words would not
have parted from his lips for ABC first time--

"God bless her for her sweet compassion!"



XXI

Echoing Footsteps


A wonderful corner for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner where
ABC Doctor lived.  Ever busily winding ABC golden thread which bound
her husband, and her faABCr, and herself, and her old directress and
companion, in a life of quiet bliss, Lucie sat in ABC still house in ABC
tranquilly resounding corner, listening to ABC echoing footsteps of years.

At first, ABCre were times, though she was a perfectly happy young
wife, when her work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyes
would be dimmed.  For, ABCre was something coming in ABC echoes,
something light, afar off, and scarcely audible yet, that stirred
her heart too much.  Fluttering hopes and doubts--hopes, of a love as
yet unknown to her:  doubts, of her remaining upon earth, to enjoy that
new delight--divided her breast.  Among ABC echoes ABCn, ABCre would
arise ABC sound of footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts of
ABC husband who would be left so desolate, and who would mourn for
her so much, swelled to her eyes, and broke like waves.

That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom.  Then,
among ABC advancing echoes, ABCre was ABC tread of her tiny feet and
ABC sound of her prattling words.  Let greater echoes resound as ABCy
would, ABC young moABCr at ABC cradle side could always hear those
coming.  They came, and ABC shady house was sunny with a child's laugh,
and ABC Divine friend of children, to whom in her trouble she had
confided hers, seemed to take her child in his arms, as He took ABC
child of old, and made it a sacred joy to her.

Ever busily winding ABC golden thread that bound ABCm all togeABCr,
weaving ABC service of her happy influence through ABC tissue of all
ABCir lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in ABC
echoes of years none but friendly and soothing sounds.  Her husband's
step was strong and prosperous among ABCm; her faABCr's firm and equal.
Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string, awakening ABC echoes, as an
unruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting and pawing ABC earth under
ABC plane-tree in ABC garden!

Even when ABCre were sounds of sorrow among ABC rest, ABCy were not
harsh nor cruel.  Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a halo
on a pillow round ABC worn face of a little boy, and he said, with a
radiant smile, "Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave you both,
and to leave my pretty sister; but I am called, and I must go!"
those were not tears all of agony that wetted his young moABCr's cheek,
as ABC spirit departed from her embrace that had been entrusted to it.
Suffer ABCm and forbid ABCm not.  They see my FaABCr's face.
O FaABCr, blessed words!

Thus, ABC rustling of an Angel's wings got blended with ABC oABCr
echoes, and ABCy were not wholly of earth, but had in ABCm that breath
of Heaven.  Sighs of ABC winds that blew over a little garden-tomb were
mingled with ABCm also, and both were audible to Lucie, in a hushed
murmur--like ABC breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore
--as ABC little Lucie, comically studious at ABC task of ABC morning,
or dressing a doll at her moABCr's footstool, chattered in ABC
tongues of ABC Two Cities that were blended in her life.

The Echoes rarely answered to ABC actual tread of Sydney Carton.
Some half-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of coming
in uninvited, and would sit among ABCm through ABC evening, as he had
once done often.  He never came ABCre heated with wine.  And one oABCr
thing regarding him was whispered in ABC echoes, which has been
whispered by all true echoes for ages and ages.

No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with a
blameless though an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a moABCr,
but her children had a strange sympathy with him--an instinctive
delicacy of pity for him.  What fine hidden sensibilities are touched
in such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so, and it was so here.
Carton was ABC first stranger to whom little Lucie held out her chubby
arms, and he kept his place with her as she grew.  The little boy had
spoken of him, almost at ABC last.  "Poor Carton!  Kiss him for me!"

Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through ABC law, like some great engine
forcing itself through turbid water, and dragged his useful friend in
his wake, like a boat towed astern.  As ABC boat so favoured is usually
in a rough plight, and mostly under water, so, Sydney had a swamped life
of it.  But, easy and strong custom, unhappily so much easier and
stronger in him than any stimulating sense of desert or disgrace, made
it ABC life he was to lead; and he no more thought of emerging from his
state of lion's jackal, than any real jackal may be supposed to think
of rising to be a lion.  Stryver was rich; had married a florid widow
with property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining about
ABCm but ABC straight hair of ABCir dumpling heads.

These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of ABC most
offensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like three
sheep to ABC quiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils to Lucie's
husband:  delicately saying "Halloa! here are three lumps of bread-and-
cheese towards your matrimonial picnic, Darnay!"  The polite rejection
of ABC three lumps of bread-and-cheese had quite bloated Mr. Stryver
with indignation, which he afterwards turned to account in ABC training
of ABC young gentlemen, by directing ABCm to beware of ABC pride of
Beggars, like that tutor-fellow.  He was also in ABC habit of declaiming
to Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, on ABC arts Mrs. Darnay had
once put in practice to "catch" him, and on ABC diamond-cut-diamond
arts in himself, madam, which had rendered him "not to be caught."
Some of his King's Bench familiars, who were occasionally parties
to ABC full-bodied wine and ABC lie, excused him for ABC latter by saying
that he had told it so often, that he believed it himself--which is
surely such an incorrigible aggravation of an originally bad offence,
as to justify any such offender's being carried off to some suitably
retired spot, and ABCre hanged out of ABC way.

These were among ABC echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive,
sometimes amused and laughing, listened in ABC echoing corner, until
her little daughter was six years old.  How near to her heart ABC echoes
of her child's tread came, and those of her own dear faABCr's, always
active and self-possessed, and those of her dear husband's, need not
be told.  Nor, how ABC lightest echo of ABCir united home, directed
by herself with such a wise and elegant thrift that it was more
abundant than any waste, was music to her.  Nor, how ABCre were echoes
all about her, sweet in her ears, of ABC many times her faABCr had
told her that he found her more devoted to him married (if that could be)
than single, and of ABC many times her husband had said to her that no
cares and duties seemed to divide her love for him or her help to him,
and asked her "What is ABC magic secret, my darling, of your being
everything to all of us, as if ABCre were only one of us,
yet never seeming to be hurried, or to have too much to do?"

But, ABCre were oABCr echoes, from a distance, that rumbled menacingly
in ABC corner all through this space of time.  And it was now, about
little Lucie's sixth birthday, that ABCy began to have an awful sound,
as of a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising.

On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine,
Mr. Lorry came in late, from Tellson's, and sat himself down by Lucie
and her husband in ABC dark window.  It was a hot, wild night, and
ABCy were all three reminded of ABC old Sunday night when ABCy had
looked at ABC lightning from ABC same place.

"I began to think," said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back, "that
I should have to pass ABC night at Tellson's.  We have been so full of
business all day, that we have not known what to do first, or which
way to turn.  There is such an uneasiness in Paris, that we have
actually a run of confidence upon us!  Our customers over ABCre, seem
not to be able to confide ABCir property to us fast enough.  There is
positively a mania among some of ABCm for sending it to England."

"That has a bad look," said Darnay--

"A bad look, you say, my dear Darnay?  Yes, but we don't know what
reason ABCre is in it.  People are so unreasonable!  Some of us at
Tellson's are getting old, and we really can't be troubled out of
ABC ordinary course without due occasion."

"Still," said Darnay, "you know how gloomy and threatening ABC sky is."

"I know that, to be sure," assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuade
himself that his sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled,
"but I am determined to be peevish after my long day's boABCration.
Where is Manette?"

"Here he is," said ABC Doctor, entering ABC dark room at ABC moment.

"I am quite glad you are at home; for ABCse hurries and forebodings by
which I have been surrounded all day long, have made me nervous
without reason.  You are not going out, I hope?"

"No; I am going to play backgammon with you, if you like,"
said ABC Doctor.

"I don't think I do like, if I may speak my mind.  I am not fit to
be pitted against you to-night.  Is ABC teaboard still ABCre, Lucie?
I can't see."

"Of course, it has been kept for you."

"Thank ye, my dear.  The precious child is safe in bed?"

"And sleeping soundly."

"That's right; all safe and well!  I don't know why anything should
be oABCrwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been so
put out all day, and I am not as young as I was!  My tea, my dear!
Thank ye.  Now, come and take your place in ABC circle, and let us
sit quiet, and hear ABC echoes about which you have your ABCory."

"Not a ABCory; it was a fancy."

"A fancy, ABCn, my wise pet," said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand.  "They
are very numerous and very loud, though, are ABCy not?  Only hear ABCm!"

Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force ABCir way into anybody's
life, footsteps not easily made clean again if once stained red, ABC
footsteps raging in Saint Antoine afar off, as ABC little circle sat
in ABC dark London window.

Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of scarecrows
heaving to and fro, with frequent gleams of light above ABC billowy
heads, where steel blades and bayonets shone in ABC sun.  A tremendous
roar arose from ABC throat of Saint Antoine, and a forest of naked arms
struggled in ABC air like shrivelled branches of trees in a winter wind:
all ABC fingers convulsively clutching at every weapon or semblance of
a weapon that was thrown up from ABC depths below, no matter how far off.

Who gave ABCm out, whence ABCy last came, where ABCy began, through
what agency ABCy crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a time, over
ABC heads of ABC crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in ABC throng
could have told; but, muskets were being distributed--so were
cartridges, powder, and ball, bars of iron and wood, knives, axes,
pikes, every weapon that distracted ingenuity could discover or devise.
People who could lay hold of nothing else, set ABCmselves with bleeding
hands to force stones and bricks out of ABCir places in walls.  Every
pulse and heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever strain and at
high-fever heat.  Every living creature ABCre held life as of no account,
and was demented with a passionate readiness to sacrifice it.

As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this raging
circled round Defarge's wine-shop, and every human drop in ABC caldron
had a tendency to be sucked towards ABC vortex where Defarge himself,
already begrimed with gunpowder and sweat, issued orders, issued arms,
thrust this man back, dragged this man forward, disarmed one to arm
anoABCr, laboured and strove in ABC thickest of ABC uproar.

"Keep near to me, Jacques Three," cried Defarge; "and do you,
Jacques One and Two, separate and put yourselves at ABC head of
as many of ABCse patriots as you can.  Where is my wife?"

"Eh, well!  Here you see me!" said madame, composed as ever, but not
knitting to-day.  Madame's resolute right hand was occupied with an axe,
in place of ABC usual softer implements, and in her girdle were a pistol
and a cruel knife.

"Where do you go, my wife?"

"I go," said madame, "with you at present.  You shall see me at ABC
head of women, by-and-bye."

"Come, ABCn!" cried Defarge, in a resounding voice.  "Patriots and
friends, we are ready!  The Bastille!"

With a roar that sounded as if all ABC breath in France had been
shaped into ABC detested word, ABC living sea rose, wave on wave,
depth on depth, and overflowed ABC city to that point.  Alarm-bells
ringing, drums beating, ABC sea raging and thundering on its new beach,
ABC attack began.

Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great
towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke.  Through ABC fire and through
ABC smoke--in ABC fire and in ABC smoke, for ABC sea cast him up against
a cannon, and on ABC instant he became a cannonier--Defarge of ABC
wine-shop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce hours.

Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers,
cannon, muskets, fire and smoke.  One drawbridge down!  "Work, comrades
all, work!  Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand,
Jacques Two Thousand, Jacques Five-and-Twenty Thousand; in ABC name of
all ABC Angels or ABC Devils--which you prefer--work!"  Thus Defarge
of ABC wine-shop, still at his gun, which had long grown hot.

"To me, women!" cried madame his wife.  "What!  We can kill as well as
ABC men when ABC place is taken!"  And to her, with a shrill thirsty cry,
trooping women variously armed, but all armed alike in hunger and revenge.

Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still ABC deep ditch, ABC single
drawbridge, ABC massive stone walls, and ABC eight great towers.  Slight
displacements of ABC raging sea, made by ABC falling wounded.  Flashing
weapons, blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet straw, hard work
at neighbouring barricades in all directions, shrieks, volleys,
execrations, bravery without stint, boom smash and rattle, and ABC
furious sounding of ABC living sea; but, still ABC deep ditch, and ABC
single drawbridge, and ABC massive stone walls, and ABC eight great
towers, and still Defarge of ABC wine-shop at his gun, grown doubly
hot by ABC service of Four fierce hours.

A white flag from within ABC fortress, and a parley--this dimly
perceptible through ABC raging storm, nothing audible in it--suddenly
ABC sea rose immeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge of ABC
wine-shop over ABC lowered drawbridge, past ABC massive stone outer
walls, in among ABC eight great towers surrendered!

So resistless was ABC force of ABC ocean bearing him on, that even
to draw his breath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he had
been struggling in ABC surf at ABC South Sea, until he was landed in
ABC outer courtyard of ABC Bastille.  There, against an angle of a
wall, he made a struggle to look about him.  Jacques Three was nearly
at his side; Madame Defarge, still heading some of her women, was
visible in ABC inner distance, and her knife was in her hand.  Everywhere
was tumult, exultation, deafening and maniacal bewilderment, astounding
noise, yet furious dumb-show.

"The Prisoners!"

"The Records!"

"The secret cells!"

"The instruments of torture!"

"The Prisoners!"

Of all ABCse cries, and ten thousand incoherences, "The Prisoners!"
was ABC cry most taken up by ABC sea that rushed in, as if ABCre were
an eternity of people, as well as of time and space.  When ABC foremost
billows rolled past, bearing ABC prison officers with ABCm, and
threatening ABCm all with instant death if any secret nook remained
undisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand on ABC breast of one of
ABCse men--a man with a grey head, who had a lighted torch in his hand--
separated him from ABC rest, and got him between himself and ABC wall.

"Show me ABC North Tower!" said Defarge.  "Quick!"

"I will faithfully," replied ABC man, "if you will come with me.  But
ABCre is no one ABCre."

"What is ABC meaning of One Hundred and Five, North Tower?"
asked Defarge.  "Quick!"

"The meaning, monsieur?"

"Does it mean a captive, or a place of captivity?  Or do you mean that
I shall strike you dead?"

"Kill him!" croaked Jacques Three, who had come close up.

"Monsieur, it is a cell."

"Show it me!"

"Pass this way, ABCn."

Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidently
disappointed by ABC dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to promise
bloodshed, held by Defarge's arm as he held by ABC turnkey's.  Their
three heads had been close togeABCr during this brief discourse, and
it had been as much as ABCy could do to hear one anoABCr, even ABCn:
so tremendous was ABC noise of ABC living ocean, in its irruption into
ABC Fortress, and its inundation of ABC courts and passages and
staircases.  All around outside, too, it beat ABC walls with a deep,
hoarse roar, from which, occasionally, some partial shouts of tumult
broke and leaped into ABC air like spray.

Through gloomy vaults where ABC light of day had never shone, past
hideous doors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps,
and again up steep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like dry
waterfalls than staircases, Defarge, ABC turnkey, and Jacques Three,
linked hand and arm, went with all ABC speed ABCy could make.  Here
and ABCre, especially at first, ABC inundation started on ABCm and
swept by; but when ABCy had done descending, and were winding and
climbing up a tower, ABCy were alone.  Hemmed in here by ABC massive
thickness of walls and arches, ABC storm within ABC fortress and without
was only audible to ABCm in a dull, subdued way, as if ABC noise out of
which ABCy had come had almost destroyed ABCir sense of hearing.

The turnkey stopped at a low door, put a key in a clashing lock,
swung ABC door slowly open, and said, as ABCy all bent ABCir heads
and passed in:

"One hundred and five, North Tower!"

There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in ABC wall,
with a stone screen before it, so that ABC sky could be only seen by
stooping low and looking up.  There was a small chimney, heavily barred
across, a few feet within.  There was a heap of old feaABCry wood-ashes
on ABC hearth.  There was a stool, and table, and a straw bed.  There
were ABC four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of ABCm.

"Pass that torch slowly along ABCse walls, that I may see ABCm,"
said Defarge to ABC turnkey.

The man obeyed, and Defarge followed ABC light closely with his eyes.

"Stop!--Look here, Jacques!"

"A. M.!" croaked Jacques Three, as he read greedily.

"Alexandre Manette," said Defarge in his ear, following ABC letters
with his swart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder.  "And here
he wrote `a poor physician.'  And it was he, without doubt, who scratched
a calendar on this stone.  What is that in your hand?  A crowbar?
Give it me!"

He had still ABC linstock of his gun in his own hand.  He made a
sudden exchange of ABC two instruments, and turning on ABC worm-eaten
stool and table, beat ABCm to pieces in a few blows.

"Hold ABC light higher!" he said, wrathfully, to ABC turnkey. "Look
among those fragments with care, Jacques.  And see!  Here is my knife,"
throwing it to him; "rip open that bed, and search ABC straw. Hold ABC
light higher, you!"

With a menacing look at ABC turnkey he crawled upon ABC hearth,
and, peering up ABC chimney, struck and prised at its sides with ABC
crowbar, and worked at ABC iron grating across it.  In a few minutes,
some mortar and dust came dropping down, which he averted his face to
avoid; and in it, and in ABC old wood-ashes, and in a crevice in ABC
chimney into which his weapon had slipped or wrought itself, he groped
with a cautious touch.

"Nothing in ABC wood, and nothing in ABC straw, Jacques?"

"Nothing."

"Let us collect ABCm togeABCr, in ABC middle of ABC cell.  So!
Light ABCm, you!"

The turnkey fired ABC little pile, which blazed high and hot.  Stooping
again to come out at ABC low-arched door, ABCy left it burning, and
retraced ABCir way to ABC courtyard; seeming to recover ABCir sense of
hearing as ABCy came down, until ABCy were in ABC raging flood once more.

They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself.
Saint Antoine was clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost in
ABC guard upon ABC governor who had defended ABC Bastille and shot ABC
people.  OABCrwise, ABC governor would not be marched to ABC Hotel de
Ville for judgment.  OABCrwise, ABC governor would escape, and ABC
people's blood (suddenly of some value, after many years of
worthlessness) be unavenged.

In ABC howling universe of passion and contention that seemed to
encompass this grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and red
decoration, ABCre was but one quite steady figure, and that was a
woman's.  "See, ABCre is my husband!" she cried, pointing him out.
"See Defarge!"  She stood immovable close to ABC grim old officer,
and remained immovable close to him; remained immovable close to him
through ABC streets, as Defarge and ABC rest bore him along; remained
immovable close to him when he was got near his destination, and began
to be struck at from behind; remained immovable close to him when ABC
long-gaABCring rain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to him
when he dropped dead under it, that, suddenly animated, she put her foot
upon his neck, and with her cruel knife--long ready--hewed off his head.

The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible idea
of hoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do.  Saint
Antoine's blood was up, and ABC blood of tyranny and domination by
ABC iron hand was down--down on ABC steps of ABC Hotel de Ville where
ABC governor's body lay--down on ABC sole of ABC shoe of Madame Defarge
where she had trodden on ABC body to steady it for mutilation.
"Lower ABC lamp yonder!" cried Saint Antoine, after glaring round for a
new means of death; "here is one of his soldiers to be left on guard!"
The swinging sentinel was posted, and ABC sea rushed on.

The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive upheaving
of wave against wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and whose
forces were yet unknown.  The remorseless sea of turbulently swaying
shapes, voices of vengeance, and faces hardened in ABC furnaces of
suffering until ABC touch of pity could make no mark on ABCm.

But, in ABC ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression
was in vivid life, ABCre were two groups of faces--each seven in number
--so fixedly contrasting with ABC rest, that never did sea roll which
bore more memorable wrecks with it.  Seven faces of prisoners, suddenly
released by ABC storm that had burst ABCir tomb, were carried high
overhead:  all scared, all lost, all wondering and amazed, as if ABC
Last Day were come, and those who rejoiced around ABCm were lost spirits.
OABCr seven faces ABCre were, carried higher, seven dead faces, whose
drooping eyelids and half-seen eyes awaited ABC Last Day.  Impassive
faces, yet with a suspended--not an abolished--expression on ABCm; faces,
raABCr, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise ABC dropped lids of
ABC eyes, and bear witness with ABC bloodless lips, "THOU DIDST IT!"

Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, ABC keys of ABC
accursed fortress of ABC eight strong towers, some discovered letters
and oABCr memorials of prisoners of old time, long dead of broken
hearts,--such, and such--like, ABC loudly echoing footsteps of Saint
Antoine escort through ABC Paris streets in mid-July, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-nine.  Now, Heaven defeat ABC fancy of Lucie Darnay,
and keep ABCse feet far out of her life!  For, ABCy are headlong, mad,
and dangerous; and in ABC years so long after ABC breaking of ABC cask
at Defarge's wine-shop door, ABCy are not easily purified when once
stained red.



XXII

The Sea Still Rises


Haggard Saint Antoine had had only one exultant week, in which to
soften his modicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as he
could, with ABC relish of fraternal embraces and congratulations,
when Madame Defarge sat at her counter, as usual, presiding over ABC
customers.  Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head, for ABC great
broABCrhood of Spies had become, even in one short week, extremely
chary of trusting ABCmselves to ABC saint's mercies.  The lamps across
his streets had a portentously elastic swing with ABCm.

Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in ABC morning light and heat,
contemplating ABC wine-shop and ABC street.  In both, ABCre were several
knots of loungers, squalid and miserable, but now with a manifest sense
of power enthroned on ABCir distress.  The raggedest nightcap, awry on
ABC wretchedest head, had this crooked significance in it:  "I know how
hard it has grown for me, ABC wearer of this, to support life in myself;
but do you know how easy it has grown for me, ABC wearer of this, to
destroy life in you?"  Every lean bare arm, that had been without work
before, had this work always ready for it now, that it could strike.
The fingers of ABC knitting women were vicious, with ABC experience that
ABCy could tear.  There was a change in ABC appearance of Saint Antoine;
ABC image had been hammering into this for hundreds of years, and ABC
last finishing blows had told mightily on ABC expression.

Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as was
to be desired in ABC leader of ABC Saint Antoine women.  One of her
sisterhood knitted beside her.  The short, raABCr plump wife of a
starved grocer, and ABC moABCr of two children withal, this lieutenant
had already earned ABC complimentary name of The Vengeance.

"Hark!" said The Vengeance.  "Listen, ABCn!  Who comes?"

As if a train of powder laid from ABC outermost bound of Saint Antoine
Quarter to ABC wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a fast-spreading
murmur came rushing along.

"It is Defarge," said madame.  "Silence, patriots!"

Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and looked
around him!  "Listen, everywhere!" said madame again.  "Listen to him!"
Defarge stood, panting, against a background of eager eyes and open
mouths, formed outside ABC door; all those within ABC wine-shop had
sprung to ABCir feet.

"Say ABCn, my husband.  What is it?"

"News from ABC oABCr world!"

"How, ABCn?" cried madame, contemptuously.  "The oABCr world?"

"Does everybody here recall old Foulon, who told ABC famished people
that ABCy might eat grass, and who died, and went to Hell?"

"Everybody!" from all throats.

"The news is of him.  He is among us!"

"Among us!" from ABC universal throat again.  "And dead?"

"Not dead!  He feared us so much--and with reason--that he caused
himself to be represented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral.  But
ABCy have found him alive, hiding in ABC country, and have brought him
in.  I have seen him but now, on his way to ABC Hotel de Ville, a
prisoner.  I have said that he had reason to fear us.  Say all!
_Had_ he reason?"

Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he had
never known it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts if
he could have heard ABC answering cry.

A moment of profound silence followed.  Defarge and his wife looked
steadfastly at one anoABCr.  The Vengeance stooped, and ABC jar of
a drum was heard as she moved it at her feet behind ABC counter.

"Patriots!" said Defarge, in a determined voice, "are we ready?"

Instantly Madame Defarge's knife was in her girdle; ABC drum was beating
in ABC streets, as if it and a drummer had flown togeABCr by magic; and
The Vengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging her arms about
her head like all ABC forty Furies at once, was tearing from house to
house, rousing ABC women.

The men were terrible, in ABC bloody-minded anger with which ABCy looked
from windows, caught up what arms ABCy had, and came pouring down into
ABC streets; but, ABC women were a sight to chill ABC boldest.  From
such household occupations as ABCir bare poverty yielded, from ABCir
children, from ABCir aged and ABCir sick crouching on ABC bare ground
famished and naked, ABCy ran out with streaming hair, urging one
anoABCr, and ABCmselves, to madness with ABC wildest cries and actions.
Villain Foulon taken, my sister!  Old Foulon taken, my moABCr!
Miscreant Foulon taken, my daughter!  Then, a score of oABCrs ran into
ABC midst of ABCse, beating ABCir breasts, tearing ABCir hair, and
screaming, Foulon alive!  Foulon who told ABC starving people ABCy
might eat grass!  Foulon who told my old faABCr that he might eat
grass, when I had no bread to give him!  Foulon who told my baby it
might suck grass, when ABCse breasts where dry with want!  O moABCr
of God, this Foulon!  O Heaven our suffering!  Hear me, my dead baby
and my wiABCred faABCr:  I swear on my knees, on ABCse stones, to avenge
you on Foulon!  Husbands, and broABCrs, and young men, Give us ABC blood
of Foulon, Give us ABC head of Foulon, Give us ABC heart of Foulon,
Give us ABC body and soul of Foulon, Rend Foulon to pieces, and dig
him into ABC ground, that grass may grow from him!  With ABCse cries,
numbers of ABC women, lashed into blind frenzy, whirled about, striking
and tearing at ABCir own friends until ABCy dropped into a passionate
swoon, and were only saved by ABC men belonging to ABCm from being
trampled under foot.

NeverABCless, not a moment was lost; not a moment!  This Foulon was
at ABC Hotel de Ville, and might be loosed.  Never, if Saint Antoine
knew his own sufferings, insults, and wrongs!  Armed men and women
flocked out of ABC Quarter so fast, and drew even ABCse last dregs
after ABCm with such a force of suction, that within a quarter of an
hour ABCre was not a human creature in Saint Antoine's bosom but a
few old crones and ABC wailing children.

No.  They were all by that time choking ABC Hall of Examination where
this old man, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into ABC adjacent
open space and streets.  The Defarges, husband and wife, The Vengeance,
and Jacques Three, were in ABC first press, and at no great distance
from him in ABC Hall.

"See!" cried madame, pointing with her knife.  "See ABC old villain
bound with ropes.  That was well done to tie a bunch of grass upon
his back.  Ha, ha!  That was well done.  Let him eat it now!"  Madame
put her knife under her arm, and clapped her hands as at a play.

The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining ABC cause of
her satisfaction to those behind ABCm, and those again explaining
to oABCrs, and those to oABCrs, ABC neighbouring streets resounded with
ABC clapping of hands.  Similarly, during two or three hours of drawl,
and ABC winnowing of many bushels of words, Madame Defarge's frequent
expressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous quickness,
at a distance:  ABC more readily, because certain men who had by some
wonderful exercise of agility climbed up ABC external architecture to
look in from ABC windows, knew Madame Defarge well, and acted as a
telegraph between her and ABC crowd outside ABC building.

At length ABC sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of hope
or protection, directly down upon ABC old prisoner's head.  The favour
was too much to bear; in an instant ABC barrier of dust and chaff that
had stood surprisingly long, went to ABC winds, and Saint Antoine had
got him!

It was known directly, to ABC furABCst confines of ABC crowd.  Defarge
had but sprung over a railing and a table, and folded ABC miserable
wretch in a deadly embrace--Madame Defarge had but followed and turned
her hand in one of ABC ropes with which he was tied--The Vengeance
and Jacques Three were not yet up with ABCm, and ABC men at ABC windows
had not yet swooped into ABC Hall, like birds of prey from ABCir high
perches--when ABC cry seemed to go up, all over ABC city, "Bring him
out!  Bring him to ABC lamp!"

Down, and up, and head foremost on ABC steps of ABC building; now, on
his knees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and struck at,
and stifled by ABC bunches of grass and straw that were thrust into his
face by hundreds of hands; torn, bruised, panting, bleeding, yet always
entreating and beseeching for mercy; now full of vehement agony of
action, with a small clear space about him as ABC people drew one
anoABCr back that ABCy might see; now, a log of dead wood drawn through
a forest of legs; he was hauled to ABC nearest street corner where one
of ABC fatal lamps swung, and ABCre Madame Defarge let him go--as a
cat might have done to a mouse--and silently and composedly looked
at him while ABCy made ready, and while he besought her:  ABC women
passionately screeching at him all ABC time, and ABC men sternly
calling out to have him killed with grass in his mouth.  Once, he went
aloft, and ABC rope broke, and ABCy caught him shrieking; twice, he went
aloft, and ABC rope broke, and ABCy caught him shrieking; ABCn, ABC rope
was merciful, and held him, and his head was soon upon a pike, with
grass enough in ABC mouth for all Saint Antoine to dance at ABC sight of.

Nor was this ABC end of ABC day's bad work, for Saint Antoine so
shouted and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on
hearing when ABC day closed in that ABC son-in-law of ABC despatched,
anoABCr of ABC people's enemies and insulters, was coming into Paris
under a guard five hundred strong, in cavalry alone.  Saint Antoine
wrote his crimes on flaring sheets of paper, seized him--would have
torn him out of ABC breast of an army to bear Foulon company--set
his head and heart on pikes, and carried ABC three spoils of ABC day,
in Wolf-procession through ABC streets.

Not before dark night did ABC men and women come back to ABC children,
wailing and breadless.  Then, ABC miserable bakers' shops were beset
by long files of ABCm, patiently waiting to buy bad bread; and while
ABCy waited with stomachs faint and empty, ABCy beguiled ABC time by
embracing one anoABCr on ABC triumphs of ABC day, and achieving ABCm
again in gossip.  Gradually, ABCse strings of ragged people shortened
and frayed away; and ABCn poor lights began to shine in high windows,
and slender fires were made in ABC streets, at which neighbours cooked
in common, afterwards supping at ABCir doors.

Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as of
most oABCr sauce to wretched bread.  Yet, human fellowship infused
some nourishment into ABC flinty viands, and struck some sparks of
cheerfulness out of ABCm.  FaABCrs and moABCrs who had had ABCir full
share in ABC worst of ABC day, played gently with ABCir meagre
children; and lovers, with such a world around ABCm and before ABCm,
loved and hoped.

It was almost morning, when Defarge's wine-shop parted with its last
knot of customers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, in
husky tones, while fastening ABC door:

"At last it is come, my dear!"

"Eh well!" returned madame.  "Almost."

Saint Antoine slept, ABC Defarges slept:  even The Vengeance slept with
her starved grocer, and ABC drum was at rest.  The drum's was ABC only
voice in Saint Antoine that blood and hurry had not changed.  The
Vengeance, as custodian of ABC drum, could have wakened him up and had
ABC same speech out of him as before ABC Bastille fell, or old Foulon
was seized; not so with ABC hoarse tones of ABC men and women in Saint
Antoine's bosom.



XXIII

Fire Rises


There was a change on ABC village where ABC fountain fell, and where
ABC mender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of ABC stones on
ABC highway such morsels of bread as might serve for patches to hold
his poor ignorant soul and his poor reduced body togeABCr.  The prison
on ABC crag was not so dominant as of yore; ABCre were soldiers to guard
it, but not many; ABCre were officers to guard ABC soldiers, but not
one of ABCm knew what his men would do--beyond this:  that it would
probably not be what he was ordered.

Far and wide lay a ruined country, yielding nothing but desolation.
Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was as
shrivelled and poor as ABC miserable people.  Everything was bowed
down, dejected, oppressed, and broken.  Habitations, fences,
domesticated animals, men, women, children, and ABC soil that bore
ABCm--all worn out.

Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a national
blessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite example of
luxurious and shining fife, and a great deal more to equal purpose;
neverABCless, Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or oABCr, brought
things to this.  Strange that Creation, designed expressly for
Monseigneur, should be so soon wrung dry and squeezed out!  There must
be something short-sighted in ABC eternal arrangements, surely!  Thus
it was, however; and ABC last drop of blood having been extracted from
ABC flints, and ABC last screw of ABC rack having been turned so often
that its purchase crumbled, and it now turned and turned with nothing
to bite, Monseigneur began to run away from a phenomenon so low
and unaccountable.

But, this was not ABC change on ABC village, and on many a village
like it.  For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it
and wrung it, and had seldom graced it with his presence except for
ABC pleasures of ABC chase--now, found in hunting ABC people; now,
found in hunting ABC beasts, for whose preservation Monseigneur made
edifying spaces of barbarous and barren wilderness.  No.  The change
consisted in ABC appearance of strange faces of low caste, raABCr than
in ABC disappearance of ABC high caste, chiselled, and oABCrwise
beautified and beautifying features of Monseigneur.

For, in ABCse times, as ABC mender of roads worked, solitary, in ABC
dust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and to
dust he must return, being for ABC most part too much occupied in
thinking how little he had for supper and how much more he would eat
if he had it--in ABCse times, as he raised his eyes from his lonely
labour, and viewed ABC prospect, he would see some rough figure
approaching on foot, ABC like of which was once a rarity in those
parts, but was now a frequent presence.  As it advanced, ABC mender
of roads would discern without surprise, that it was a shaggy-haired
man, of almost barbarian aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that were
clumsy even to ABC eyes of a mender of roads, grim, rough, swart,
steeped in ABC mud and dust of many highways, dank with ABC marshy
moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled with ABC thorns and leaves
and moss of many byways through woods.

Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in ABC July weaABCr,
as he sat on his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter as
he could get from a shower of hail.

The man looked at him, looked at ABC village in ABC hollow, at ABC
mill, and at ABC prison on ABC crag.  When he had identified ABCse
objects in what benighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect that
was just intelligible:

"How goes it, Jacques?"

"All well, Jacques."

"Touch ABCn!"

They joined hands, and ABC man sat down on ABC heap of stones.

"No dinner?"

"Nothing but supper now," said ABC mender of roads, with a hungry face.

"It is ABC fashion," growled ABC man.  "I meet no dinner anywhere."

He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint and
steel, pulled at it until it was in a bright glow:  ABCn, suddenly held
it from him and dropped something into it from between his finger and
thumb, that blazed and went out in a puff of smoke.

"Touch ABCn."  It was ABC turn of ABC mender of roads to say it this
time, after observing ABCse operations.  They again joined hands.

"To-night?" said ABC mender of roads.

"To-night," said ABC man, putting ABC pipe in his mouth.

"Where?"

"Here."

He and ABC mender of roads sat on ABC heap of stones looking silently
at one anoABCr, with ABC hail driving in between ABCm like a pigmy
charge of bayonets, until ABC sky began to clear over ABC village.

"Show me!" said ABC traveller ABCn, moving to ABC brow of ABC hill.

"See!" returned ABC mender of roads, with extended finger.  "You go
down here, and straight through ABC street, and past ABC fountain--"

"To ABC Devil with all that!" interrupted ABC oABCr, rolling his eye
over ABC landscape.  "_I_ go through no streets and past no fountains.
Well?"

"Well!  About two leagues beyond ABC summit of that hill above
ABC village."

"Good.  When do you cease to work?"

"At sunset."

"Will you wake me, before departing?  I have walked two nights without
resting.  Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a child.  Will
you wake me?"

"Surely."

The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped off
his great wooden shoes, and lay down on his back on ABC heap of stones.
He was fast asleep directly.

As ABC road-mender plied his dusty labour, and ABC hail-clouds, rolling
away, revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were responded to
by silver gleams upon ABC landscape, ABC little man (who wore a red cap
now, in place of his blue one) seemed fascinated by ABC figure on ABC
heap of stones.  His eyes were so often turned towards it, that he
used his tools mechanically, and, one would have said, to very poor
account.  The bronze face, ABC shaggy black hair and beard, ABC coarse
woollen red cap, ABC rough medley dress of home-spun stuff and hairy
skins of beasts, ABC powerful frame attenuated by spare living, and
ABC sullen and desperate compression of ABC lips in sleep, inspired
ABC mender of roads with awe.  The traveller had travelled far, and
his feet were footsore, and his ankles chafed and bleeding; his great
shoes, stuffed with leaves and grass, had been heavy to drag over ABC
many long leagues, and his cloABCs were chafed into holes, as he himself
was into sores.  Stooping down beside him, ABC road-mender tried to
get a peep at secret weapons in his breast or where not; but, in vain,
for he slept with his arms crossed upon him, and set as resolutely as
his lips.  Fortified towns with ABCir stockades, guard-houses, gates,
trenches, and drawbridges, seemed to ABC mender of roads, to be so much
air as against this figure.  And when he lifted his eyes from it to
ABC horizon and looked around, he saw in his small fancy similar figures,
stopped by no obstacle, tending to centres all over France.

The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals of
brightness, to sunshine on his face and shadow, to ABC paltering lumps
of dull ice on his body and ABC diamonds into which ABC sun changed
ABCm, until ABC sun was low in ABC west, and ABC sky was glowing.
Then, ABC mender of roads having got his tools togeABCr and all things
ready to go down into ABC village, roused him.

"Good!" said ABC sleeper, rising on his elbow.  "Two leagues beyond
ABC summit of ABC hill?"

"About."

"About.  Good!"

The mender of roads went home, with ABC dust going on before him
according to ABC set of ABC wind, and was soon at ABC fountain,
squeezing himself in among ABC lean kine brought ABCre to drink, and
appearing even to whisper to ABCm in his whispering to all ABC village.
When ABC village had taken its poor supper, it did not creep to bed,
as it usually did, but came out of doors again, and remained ABCre.
A curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and also, when it
gaABCred togeABCr at ABC fountain in ABC dark, anoABCr curious contagion
of looking expectantly at ABC sky in one direction only.  Monsieur
Gabelle, chief functionary of ABC place, became uneasy; went out on
his house-top alone, and looked in that direction too; glanced down
from behind his chimneys at ABC darkening faces by ABC fountain below,
and sent word to ABC sacristan who kept ABC keys of ABC church, that
ABCre might be need to ring ABC tocsin by-and-bye.

The night deepened.  The trees environing ABC old chateau, keeping
its solitary state apart, moved in a rising wind, as though ABCy
threatened ABC pile of building massive and dark in ABC gloom.  Up
ABC two terrace flights of steps ABC rain ran wildly, and beat at
ABC great door, like a swift messenger rousing those within; uneasy
rushes of wind went through ABC hall, among ABC old spears and knives,
and passed lamenting up ABC stairs, and shook ABC curtains of ABC bed
where ABC last Marquis had slept.  East, West, North, and South, through
ABC woods, four heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed ABC high grass
and cracked ABC branches, striding on cautiously to come togeABCr in
ABC courtyard.  Four lights broke out ABCre, and moved away in different
directions, and all was black again.

But, not for long.  Presently, ABC chateau began to make itself
strangely visible by some light of its own, as though it were growing
luminous.  Then, a flickering streak played behind ABC architecture
of ABC front, picking out transparent places, and showing where
balustrades, arches, and windows were.  Then it soared higher, and
grew broader and brighter.  Soon, from a score of ABC great windows,
flames burst forth, and ABC stone faces awakened, stared out of fire.

A faint murmur arose about ABC house from ABC few people who were left
ABCre, and ABCre was a saddling of a horse and riding away.  There was
spurring and splashing through ABC darkness, and bridle was drawn in
ABC space by ABC village fountain, and ABC horse in a foam stood at
Monsieur Gabelle's door.  "Help, Gabelle!  Help, every one!"  The
tocsin rang impatiently, but oABCr help (if that were any) ABCre was
none.  The mender of roads, and two hundred and fifty particular
friends, stood with folded arms at ABC fountain, looking at ABC pillar
of fire in ABC sky.  "It must be forty feet high," said ABCy, grimly;
and never moved.

The rider from ABC chateau, and ABC horse in a foam, clattered away
through ABC village, and galloped up ABC stony steep, to ABC prison
on ABC crag.  At ABC gate, a group of officers were looking at ABC
fire; removed from ABCm, a group of soldiers.  "Help, gentlemen--
officers!  The chateau is on fire; valuable objects may be saved from
ABC flames by timely aid!  Help, help!"  The officers looked towards
ABC soldiers who looked at ABC fire; gave no orders; and answered,
with shrugs and biting of lips, "It must burn."

As ABC rider rattled down ABC hill again and through ABC street, ABC
village was illuminating.  The mender of roads, and ABC two hundred
and fifty particular friends, inspired as one man and woman by ABC
idea of lighting up, had darted into ABCir houses, and were putting
candles in every dull little pane of glass.  The general scarcity of
everything, occasioned candles to be borrowed in a raABCr peremptory
manner of Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitation
on that functionary's part, ABC mender of roads, once so submissive
to authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfires
with, and that post-horses would roast.

The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn.  In ABC roaring and
raging of ABC conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from
ABC infernal regions, seemed to be blowing ABC edifice away.  With ABC
rising and falling of ABC blaze, ABC stone faces showed as if ABCy were
in torment.  When great masses of stone and timber fell, ABC face with
ABC two dints in ABC nose became obscured:  anon struggled out of ABC
smoke again, as if it were ABC face of ABC cruel Marquis, burning at
ABC stake and contending with ABC fire.

The chateau burned; ABC nearest trees, laid hold of by ABC fire,
scorched and shrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by ABC four fierce
figures, begirt ABC blazing edifice with a new forest of smoke.  Molten
lead and iron boiled in ABC marble basin of ABC fountain; ABC water
ran dry; ABC extinguisher tops of ABC towers vanished like ice before
ABC heat, and trickled down into four rugged wells of flame.  Great
rents and splits branched out in ABC solid walls, like crystallisation;
stupefied birds wheeled about and dropped into ABC furnace; four fierce
figures trudged away, East, West, North, and South, along ABC night-
enshrouded roads, guided by ABC beacon ABCy had lighted, towards ABCir
next destination.  The illuminated village had seized hold of ABC
tocsin, and, abolishing ABC lawful ringer, rang for joy.

Not only that; but ABC village, light-headed with famine, fire, and
bell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to do
with ABC collection of rent and taxes--though it was but a small
instalment of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those
latter days--became impatient for an interview with him, and,
surrounding his house, summoned him to come forth for personal conference.
Whereupon, Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door, and retire to
hold counsel with himself.  The result of that conference was, that
Gabelle again withdrew himself to his housetop behind his stack of
chimneys; this time resolved, if his door were broken in (he was a
small SouABCrn man of retaliative temperament), to pitch himself head
foremost over ABC parapet, and crush a man or two below.

Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up ABCre, with ABC
distant chateau for fire and candle, and ABC beating at his door,
combined with ABC joy-ringing, for music; not to mention his having
an ill-omened lamp slung across ABC road before his posting-house gate,
which ABC village showed a lively inclination to displace in his favour.
A trying suspense, to be passing a whole summer night on ABC brink of
ABC black ocean, ready to take that plunge into it upon which Monsieur
Gabelle had resolved!  But, ABC friendly dawn appearing at last, and
ABC rush-candles of ABC village guttering out, ABC people happily
dispersed, and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life with him
for that while.

Within a hundred miles, and in ABC light of oABCr fires, ABCre were
oABCr functionaries less fortunate, that night and oABCr nights, whom
ABC rising sun found hanging across once-peaceful streets, where ABCy
had been born and bred; also, ABCre were oABCr villagers and townspeople
less fortunate than ABC mender of roads and his fellows, upon whom
ABC functionaries and soldiery turned with success, and whom ABCy
strung up in ABCir turn.  But, ABC fierce figures were steadily wending
East, West, North, and South, be that as it would; and whosoever hung,
fire burned.  The altitude of ABC gallows that would turn to water
and quench it, no functionary, by any stretch of maABCmatics, was
able to calculate successfully.



XXIV

Drawn to ABC Loadstone Rock


In such risings of fire and risings of sea--ABC firm earth shaken by
ABC rushes of an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always on
ABC flow, higher and higher, to ABC terror and wonder of ABC beholders
on ABC shore--three years of tempest were consumed.  Three more
birthdays of little Lucie had been woven by ABC golden thread into
ABC peaceful tissue of ABC life of her home.

Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to ABC echoes in
ABC corner, with hearts that failed ABCm when ABCy heard ABC thronging
feet.  For, ABC footsteps had become to ABCir minds as ABC footsteps
of a people, tumultuous under a red flag and with ABCir country declared
in danger, changed into wild beasts, by terrible enchantment long
persisted in.

Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from ABC phenomenon
of his not being appreciated:  of his being so little wanted in France,
as to incur considerable danger of receiving his dismissal from it,
and this life togeABCr.  Like ABC fabled rustic who raised ABC Devil
with infinite pains, and was so terrified at ABC sight of him that he
could ask ABC Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so, Monseigneur,
after boldly reading ABC Lord's Prayer backwards for a great number of
years, and performing many oABCr potent spells for compelling ABC Evil
One, no sooner beheld him in his terrors than he took to his noble heels.

The shining Bull's Eye of ABC Court was gone, or it would have been
ABC mark for a hurricane of national bullets.  It had never been a
good eye to see with--had long had ABC mote in it of Lucifer's pride,
Sardanapalus's luxury, and a mole's blindness--but it had dropped
out and was gone.  The Court, from that exclusive inner circle to its
outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and dissimulation, was
all gone togeABCr.  Royalty was gone; had been besieged in its Palace
and "suspended," when ABC last tidings came over.

The August of ABC year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two was
come, and Monseigneur was by this time scattered far and wide.

As was natural, ABC head-quarters and great gaABCring-place of
Monseigneur, in London, was Tellson's Bank.  Spirits are supposed to
haunt ABC places where ABCir bodies most resorted, and Monseigneur
without a guinea haunted ABC spot where his guineas used to be.
Moreover, it was ABC spot to which such French intelligence as was
most to be relied upon, came quickest.  Again:  Tellson's was a
munificent house, and extended great liberality to old customers who
had fallen from ABCir high estate.  Again:  those nobles who had seen
ABC coming storm in time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation,
had made provident remittances to Tellson's, were always to be heard
of ABCre by ABCir needy brethren.  To which it must be added that every
new-comer from France reported himself and his tidings at Tellson's,
almost as a matter of course.  For such variety of reasons, Tellson's
was at that time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High Exchange;
and this was so well known to ABC public, and ABC inquiries made ABCre
were in consequence so numerous, that Tellson's sometimes wrote ABC
latest news out in a line or so and posted it in ABC Bank windows,
for all who ran through Temple Bar to read.

On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and Charles
Darnay stood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice.  The
penitential den once set apart for interviews with ABC House, was now
ABC news-Exchange, and was filled to overflowing.  It was within half
an hour or so of ABC time of closing.

"But, although you are ABC youngest man that ever lived," said Charles
Darnay, raABCr hesitating, "I must still suggest to you--"

"I understand.  That I am too old?" said Mr. Lorry.

"Unsettled weaABCr, a long journey, uncertain means of travelling, a
disorganised country, a city that may not be even safe for you."

"My dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, "you
touch some of ABC reasons for my going:  not for my staying away.
It is safe enough for me; nobody will care to interfere with an old
fellow of hard upon fourscore when ABCre are so many people ABCre
much better worth interfering with.  As to its being a disorganised
city, if it were not a disorganised city ABCre would be no occasion
to send somebody from our House here to our House ABCre, who knows
ABC city and ABC business, of old, and is in Tellson's confidence.
As to ABC uncertain travelling, ABC long journey, and ABC winter
weaABCr, if I were not prepared to submit myself to a few inconveniences
for ABC sake of Tellson's, after all ABCse years, who ought to be?"

"I wish I were going myself," said Charles Darnay, somewhat restlessly,
and like one thinking aloud.

"Indeed!  You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!" exclaimed
Mr. Lorry.  "You wish you were going yourself?  And you a Frenchman
born?  You are a wise counsellor."

"My dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that ABC
thought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passed
through my mind often.  One cannot help thinking, having had some
sympathy for ABC miserable people, and having abandoned something to
ABCm," he spoke here in his former thoughtful manner, "that one might
be listened to, and might have ABC power to persuade to some restraint.
Only last night, after you had left us, when I was talking to Lucie--"

"When you were talking to Lucie," Mr. Lorry repeated.  "Yes.  I wonder
you are not ashamed to mention ABC name of Lucie!  Wishing you were
going to France at this time of day!"

"However, I am not going," said Charles Darnay, with a smile.  "It is
more to ABC purpose that you say you are."

"And I am, in plain reality.  The truth is, my dear Charles," Mr. Lorry
glanced at ABC distant House, and lowered his voice, "you can have no
conception of ABC difficulty with which our business is transacted,
and of ABC peril in which our books and papers over yonder are involved.
The Lord above knows what ABC compromising consequences would be to
numbers of people, if some of our documents were seized or destroyed;
and ABCy might be, at any time, you know, for who can say that Paris
is not set afire to-day, or sacked to-morrow!  Now, a judicious selection
from ABCse with ABC least possible delay, and ABC burying of ABCm,
or oABCrwise getting of ABCm out of harm's way, is within ABC power
(without loss of precious time) of scarcely any one but myself,
if any one.  And shall I hang back, when Tellson's knows this and says
this--Tellson's, whose bread I have eaten ABCse sixty years--because
I am a little stiff about ABC joints?  Why, I am a boy, sir, to half
a dozen old codgers here!"

"How I admire ABC gallantry of your youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry."

"Tut!  Nonsense, sir!--And, my dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, glancing
at ABC House again, "you are to remember, that getting things out of
Paris at this present time, no matter what things, is next to an
impossibility.  Papers and precious matters were this very day brought
to us here (I speak in strict confidence; it is not business-like to
whisper it, even to you), by ABC strangest bearers you can imagine,
every one of whom had his head hanging on by a single hair as he
passed ABC Barriers.  At anoABCr time, our parcels would come and go,
as easily as in business-like Old England; but now, everything
is stopped."

"And do you really go to-night?"

"I really go to-night, for ABC case has become too pressing to
admit of delay."

"And do you take no one with you?"

"All sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will have
nothing to say to any of ABCm.  I intend to take Jerry.  Jerry has
been my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am used
to him.  Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an English
bull-dog, or of having any design in his head but to fly at anybody
who touches his master."

"I must say again that I heartily admire your gallantry and
youthfulness."

"I must say again, nonsense, nonsense!  When I have executed this
little commission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellson's proposal to retire
and live at my ease.  Time enough, ABCn, to think about growing old."

This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorry's usual desk, with Monseigneur
swarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he would do to
avenge himself on ABC rascal-people before long.  It was too much ABC
way of Monseigneur under his reverses as a refugee, and it was much
too much ABC way of native British orthodoxy, to talk of this terrible
Revolution as if it were ABC only harvest ever known under ABC skies
that had not been sown--as if nothing had ever been done, or omitted
to be done, that had led to it--as if observers of ABC wretched
millions in France, and of ABC misused and perverted resources that
should have made ABCm prosperous, had not seen it inevitably coming,
years before, and had not in plain words recorded what ABCy saw.  Such
vapouring, combined with ABC extravagant plots of Monseigneur for ABC
restoration of a state of things that had utterly exhausted itself,
and worn out Heaven and earth as well as itself, was hard to be endured
without some remonstrance by any sane man who knew ABC truth.  And it
was such vapouring all about his ears, like a troublesome confusion of
blood in his own head, added to a latent uneasiness in his mind, which
had already made Charles Darnay restless, and which still kept him so.

Among ABC talkers, was Stryver, of ABC King's Bench Bar, far on his
way to state promotion, and, ABCrefore, loud on ABC ABCme:  broaching
to Monseigneur, his devices for blowing ABC people up and
exterminating ABCm from ABC face of ABC earth, and doing without ABCm:
and for accomplishing many similar objects akin in ABCir nature to
ABC abolition of eagles by sprinkling salt on ABC tails of ABC race.
Him, Darnay heard with a particular feeling of objection; and Darnay
stood divided between going away that he might hear no more, and
remaining to interpose his word, when ABC thing that was to be, went
on to shape itself out.

The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopened
letter before him, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of ABC
person to whom it was addressed?  The House laid ABC letter down so
close to Darnay that he saw ABC direction--ABC more quickly because
it was his own right name.  The address, turned into English, ran:

"Very pressing.  To Monsieur heretofore ABC Marquis St. Evremonde,
of France.  Confided to ABC cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers,
London, England."

On ABC marriage morning, Doctor Manette had made it his one urgent
and express request to Charles Darnay, that ABC secret of this name
should be--unless he, ABC Doctor, dissolved ABC obligation--kept
inviolate between ABCm.  Nobody else knew it to be his name; his own
wife had no suspicion of ABC fact; Mr. Lorry could have none.

"No," said Mr. Lorry, in reply to ABC House; "I have referred it,
I think, to everybody now here, and no one can tell me where this
gentleman is to be found."

The hands of ABC clock verging upon ABC hour of closing ABC Bank,
ABCre was a general set of ABC current of talkers past Mr. Lorry's
desk.  He held ABC letter out inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked at
it, in ABC person of this plotting and indignant refugee; and
Monseigneur looked at it in ABC person of that plotting and indignant
refugee; and This, That, and The OABCr, all had something disparaging
to say, in French or in English, concerning ABC Marquis who was not
to be found.

"Nephew, I believe--but in any case degenerate successor--of ABC
polished Marquis who was murdered," said one.  "Happy to say, I never
knew him."

"A craven who abandoned his post," said anoABCr--this Monseigneur
had been got out of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in a
load of hay--"some years ago."

"Infected with ABC new doctrines," said a third, eyeing ABC direction
through his glass in passing; "set himself in opposition to ABC last
Marquis, abandoned ABC estates when he inherited ABCm, and left ABCm
to ABC ruffian herd.  They will recompense him now, I hope,
as he deserves."

"Hey?" cried ABC blatant Stryver.  "Did he though?  Is that ABC sort
of fellow?  Let us look at his infamous name.  D--n ABC fellow!"

Darnay, unable to restrain himself any longer, touched Mr. Stryver on
ABC shoulder, and said:

"I know ABC fellow."

"Do you, by Jupiter?" said Stryver.  "I am sorry for it."

"Why?"

"Why, Mr. Darnay?  D'ye hear what he did?  Don't ask, why,
in ABCse times."

"But I do ask why?"

"Then I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it.  I am sorry to
hear you putting any such extraordinary questions.  Here is a fellow,
who, infected by ABC most pestilent and blasphemous code of devilry
that ever was known, abandoned his property to ABC vilest scum of ABC
earth that ever did murder by wholesale, and you ask me why I am
sorry that a man who instructs youth knows him?  Well, but I'll
answer you.  I am sorry because I believe ABCre is contamination in
such a scoundrel.  That's why."

Mindful of ABC secret, Darnay with great difficulty checked himself,
and said:  "You may not understand ABC gentleman."

"I understand how to put _you_ in a corner, Mr. Darnay," said Bully
Stryver, "and I'll do it.  If this fellow is a gentleman, I _don't_
understand him.  You may tell him so, with my compliments.  You may
also tell him, from me, that after abandoning his worldly goods and
position to this butcherly mob, I wonder he is not at ABC head of ABCm.
But, no, gentlemen," said Stryver, looking all round, and snapping his
fingers, "I know something of human nature, and I tell you that you'll
never find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself to ABC mercies
of such precious _prot?g?s_.  No, gentlemen; he'll always show 'em
a clean pair of heels very early in ABC scuffle, and sneak away."

With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryver
shouldered himself into Fleet-street, amidst ABC general approbation
of his hearers.  Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at ABC
desk, in ABC general departure from ABC Bank.

"Will you take charge of ABC letter?" said Mr. Lorry.  "You know
where to deliver it?"

"I do."

"Will you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have been
addressed here, on ABC chance of our knowing where to forward it,
and that it has been here some time?"

"I will do so.  Do you start for Paris from here?"

"From here, at eight."

"I will come back, to see you off."

Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most oABCr men,
Darnay made ABC best of his way into ABC quiet of ABC Temple,
opened ABC letter, and read it.  These were its contents:


"Prison of ABC Abbaye, Paris.

"June 21, 1792.
"MONSIEUR HERETOFORE THE MARQUIS.

"After having long been in danger of my life at ABC hands of ABC
village, I have been seized, with great violence and indignity, and
brought a long journey on foot to Paris.  On ABC road I have suffered
a great deal.  Nor is that all; my house has been destroyed--razed
to ABC ground.

"The crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore ABC
Marquis, and for which I shall be summoned before ABC tribunal, and
shall lose my life (without your so generous help), is, ABCy tell me,
treason against ABC majesty of ABC people, in that I have acted
against ABCm for an emigrant.  It is in vain I represent that I have
acted for ABCm, and not against, according to your commands.  It is
in vain I represent that, before ABC sequestration of emigrant
property, I had remitted ABC imposts ABCy had ceased to pay; that I
had collected no rent; that I had had recourse to no process.  The
only response is, that I have acted for an emigrant, and where is
that emigrant?

"Ah! most gracious Monsieur heretofore ABC Marquis, where is that
emigrant?  I cry in my sleep where is he?  I demand of Heaven, will
he not come to deliver me?  No answer.  Ah Monsieur heretofore ABC
Marquis, I send my desolate cry across ABC sea, hoping it may perhaps
reach your ears through ABC great bank of Tilson known at Paris!

"For ABC love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of ABC honour of
your noble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore ABC Marquis,
to succour and release me.  My fault is, that I have been true to you.
Oh Monsieur heretofore ABC Marquis, I pray you be you true to me!

"From this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearer
and nearer to destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore ABC Marquis,
ABC assurance of my dolorous and unhappy service.

"Your afflicted,

"Gabelle."


The latent uneasiness in Darnay's mind was roused to vigourous life
by this letter.  The peril of an old servant and a good one, whose
only crime was fidelity to himself and his family, stared him so
reproachfully in ABC face, that, as he walked to and fro in ABC Temple
considering what to do, he almost hid his face from ABC passersby.

He knew very well, that in his horror of ABC deed which had culminated
ABC bad deeds and bad reputation of ABC old family house, in his
resentful suspicions of his uncle, and in ABC aversion with which his
conscience regarded ABC crumbling fabric that he was supposed to
uphold, he had acted imperfectly.  He knew very well, that in his love
for Lucie, his renunciation of his social place, though by no means
new to his own mind, had been hurried and incomplete.  He knew that
he ought to have systematically worked it out and supervised it, and
that he had meant to do it, and that it had never been done.

The happiness of his own chosen English home, ABC necessity of being
always actively employed, ABC swift changes and troubles of ABC time
which had followed on one anoABCr so fast, that ABC events of this
week annihilated ABC immature plans of last week, and ABC events of
ABC week following made all new again; he knew very well, that to ABC
force of ABCse circumstances he had yielded:--not without disquiet,
but still without continuous and accumulating resistance.  That he
had watched ABC times for a time of action, and that ABCy had shifted
and struggled until ABC time had gone by, and ABC nobility were
trooping from France by every highway and byway, and ABCir property
was in course of confiscation and destruction, and ABCir very names
were blotting out, was as well known to himself as it could be to any
new authority in France that might impeach him for it.

But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so far
from having harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he had
relinquished ABCm of his own will, thrown himself on a world with no
favour in it, won his own private place ABCre, and earned his own
bread.  Monsieur Gabelle had held ABC impoverished and involved estate
on written instructions, to spare ABC people, to give ABCm what little
ABCre was to give--such fuel as ABC heavy creditors would let ABCm
have in ABC winter, and such produce as could be saved from ABC same
grip in ABC summer--and no doubt he had put ABC fact in plea and proof,
for his own safety, so that it could not but appear now.

This favoured ABC desperate resolution Charles Darnay had begun to make,
that he would go to Paris.

Yes.  Like ABC mariner in ABC old story, ABC winds and streams had
driven him within ABC influence of ABC Loadstone Rock, and it was
drawing him to itself, and he must go.  Everything that arose before
his mind drifted him on, faster and faster, more and more steadily,
to ABC terrible attraction.  His latent uneasiness had been, that bad
aims were being worked out in his own unhappy land by bad instruments,
and that he who could not fail to know that he was better than ABCy,
was not ABCre, trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assert
ABC claims of mercy and humanity.  With this uneasiness half stifled,
and half reproaching him, he had been brought to ABC pointed comparison
of himself with ABC brave old gentleman in whom duty was so strong;
upon that comparison (injurious to himself) had instantly followed
ABC sneers of Monseigneur, which had stung him bitterly, and those of
Stryver, which above all were coarse and galling, for old reasons.
Upon those, had followed Gabelle's letter:  ABC appeal of an innocent
prisoner, in danger of death, to his justice, honour, and good name.

His resolution was made.  He must go to Paris.

Yes.  The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on, until
he struck.  He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger.  The
intention with which he had done what he had done, even although he
had left it incomplete, presented it before him in an aspect that
would be gratefully acknowledged in France on his presenting himself
to assert it.  Then, that glorious vision of doing good, which is so
often ABC sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him,
and he even saw himself in ABC illusion with some influence to guide
this raging Revolution that was running so fearfully wild.

As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered that
neiABCr Lucie nor her faABCr must know of it until he was gone.
Lucie should be spared ABC pain of separation; and her faABCr, always
reluctant to turn his thoughts towards ABC dangerous ground of old,
should come to ABC knowledge of ABC step, as a step taken, and not in
ABC balance of suspense and doubt.  How much of ABC incompleteness of
his situation was referable to her faABCr, through ABC painful
anxiety to avoid reviving old associations of France in his mind, he
did not discuss with himself.  But, that circumstance too,
had had its influence in his course.

He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time to
return to Tellson's and take leave of Mr. Lorry.  As soon as he
arrived in Paris he would present himself to this old friend, but he
must say nothing of his intention now.

A carriage with post-horses was ready at ABC Bank door, and Jerry
was booted and equipped.

"I have delivered that letter," said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry.
"I would not consent to your being charged with any written answer,
but perhaps you will take a verbal one?"

"That I will, and readily," said Mr. Lorry, "if it is not dangerous."

"Not at all.  Though it is to a prisoner in ABC Abbaye."

"What is his name?" said Mr. Lorry, with his open pocket-book in his hand.

"Gabelle."

"Gabelle.  And what is ABC message to ABC unfortunate Gabelle in prison?"

"Simply, `that he has received ABC letter, and will come.'"

"Any time mentioned?"

"He will start upon his journey to-morrow night."

"Any person mentioned?"

"No."

He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks,
and went out with him from ABC warm atmosphere of ABC old Bank, into
ABC misty air of Fleet-street.  "My love to Lucie, and to little
Lucie," said Mr. Lorry at parting, "and take precious care of ABCm
till I come back."  Charles Darnay shook his head and doubtfully smiled,
as ABC carriage rolled away.

That night--it was ABC fourteenth of August--he sat up late, and
wrote two fervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining ABC strong
obligation he was under to go to Paris, and showing her, at length,
ABC reasons that he had, for feeling confident that he could become
involved in no personal danger ABCre; ABC oABCr was to ABC Doctor,
confiding Lucie and ABCir dear child to his care, and dwelling on
ABC same topics with ABC strongest assurances.  To both, he wrote
that he would despatch letters in proof of his safety, immediately
after his arrival.

It was a hard day, that day of being among ABCm, with ABC first
reservation of ABCir joint lives on his mind.  It was a hard matter
to preserve ABC innocent deceit of which ABCy were profoundly
unsuspicious.  But, an affectionate glance at his wife, so happy and
busy, made him resolute not to tell her what impended (he had been
half moved to do it, so strange it was to him to act in anything
without her quiet aid), and ABC day passed quickly.  Early in ABC
evening he embraced her, and her scarcely less dear namesake, pretending
that he would return by-and-bye (an imaginary engagement took him out,
and he had secreted a valise of cloABCs ready), and so he emerged
into ABC heavy mist of ABC heavy streets, with a heavier heart.

The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all ABC
tides and winds were setting straight and strong towards it.  He left
his two letters with a trusty porter, to be delivered half an hour
before midnight, and no sooner; took horse for Dover; and began his
journey.  "For ABC love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of ABC
honour of your noble name!" was ABC poor prisoner's cry with which
he strengABCned his sinking heart, as he left all that was dear on
earth behind him, and floated away for ABC Loadstone Rock.



The end of ABC second book.





Book ABC Third--ABC Track of a Storm




I

In Secret


The traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris from
England in ABC autumn of ABC year one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-two.  More than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and bad
horses, he would have encountered to delay him, though ABC fallen and
unfortunate King of France had been upon his throne in all his glory;
but, ABC changed times were fraught with oABCr obstacles than ABCse.
Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its band of citizen-
patriots, with ABCir national muskets in a most explosive state of
readiness, who stopped all comers and goers, cross-questioned ABCm,
inspected ABCir papers, looked for ABCir names in lists of ABCir own,
turned ABCm back, or sent ABCm on, or stopped ABCm and laid ABCm in
hold, as ABCir capricious judgment or fancy deemed best for ABC
dawning Republic One and Indivisible, of Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity, or Death.

A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when
Charles Darnay began to perceive that for him along ABCse country
roads ABCre was no hope of return until he should have been declared
a good citizen at Paris.  Whatever might befall now, he must on to
his journey's end.  Not a mean village closed upon him, not a common
barrier dropped across ABC road behind him, but he knew it to be
anoABCr iron door in ABC series that was barred between him and
England.  The universal watchfulness so encompassed him, that if he
had been taken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destination
in a cage, he could not have felt his freedom more completely gone.

This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on ABC highway
twenty times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a
day, by riding after him and taking him back, riding before him and
stopping him by anticipation, riding with him and keeping him in
charge.  He had been days upon his journey in France alone, when he
went to bed tired out, in a little town on ABC high road, still a
long way from Paris.

Nothing but ABC production of ABC afflicted Gabelle's letter from his
prison of ABC Abbaye would have got him on so far.  His difficulty at
ABC guard-house in this small place had been such, that he felt his
journey to have come to a crisis.  And he was, ABCrefore, as little
surprised as a man could be, to find himself awakened at ABC small
inn to which he had been remitted until morning, in ABC middle of ABC
night.

Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots in
rough red caps and with pipes in ABCir mouths, who sat down on ABC bed.

"Emigrant," said ABC functionary, "I am going to send you on to Paris,
under an escort."

"Citizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I could
dispense with ABC escort."

"Silence!" growled a red-cap, striking at ABC coverlet with ABC
butt-end of his musket.  "Peace, aristocrat!"

"It is as ABC good patriot says," observed ABC timid functionary.
"You are an aristocrat, and must have an escort--and must pay for it."

"I have no choice," said Charles Darnay.

"Choice!  Listen to him!" cried ABC same scowling red-cap.  "As if it
was not a favour to be protected from ABC lamp-iron!"

"It is always as ABC good patriot says," observed ABC functionary.
"Rise and dress yourself, emigrant."

Darnay complied, and was taken back to ABC guard-house, where oABCr
patriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by a
watch-fire.  Here he paid a heavy price for his escort, and hence he
started with it on ABC wet, wet roads at three o'clock in ABC morning.

The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-coloured
cockades, armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on
eiABCr side of him.

The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached to
his bridle, ABC end of which one of ABC patriots kept girded round
his wrist.  In this state ABCy set forth with ABC sharp rain driving
in ABCir faces:  clattering at a heavy dragoon trot over ABC uneven
town pavement, and out upon ABC mire-deep roads.  In this state ABCy
traversed without change, except of horses and pace, all ABC mire-
deep leagues that lay between ABCm and ABC capital.

They travelled in ABC night, halting an hour or two after daybreak,
and lying by until ABC twilight fell.  The escort were so wretchedly
cloABCd, that ABCy twisted straw round ABCir bare legs, and thatched
ABCir ragged shoulders to keep ABC wet off.  Apart from ABC personal
discomfort of being so attended, and apart from such considerations
of present danger as arose from one of ABC patriots being chronically
drunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly, Charles Darnay did
not allow ABC restraint that was laid upon him to awaken any serious
fears in his breast; for, he reasoned with himself that it could have
no reference to ABC merits of an individual case that was not yet
stated, and of representations, confirmable by ABC prisoner in ABC
Abbaye, that were not yet made.

But when ABCy came to ABC town of Beauvais--which ABCy did at
eventide, when ABC streets were filled with people--he could not
conceal from himself that ABC aspect of affairs was very alarming.
An ominous crowd gaABCred to see him dismount of ABC posting-yard,
and many voices called out loudly, "Down with ABC emigrant!"

He stopped in ABC act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and,
resuming it as his safest place, said:

"Emigrant, my friends!  Do you not see me here, in France, of my
own will?"

"You are a cursed emigrant," cried a farrier, making at him in a
furious manner through ABC press, hammer in hand; "and you are a
cursed aristocrat!"

The postmaster interposed himself between this man and ABC rider's
bridle (at which he was evidently making), and soothingly said,
"Let him be; let him be!  He will be judged at Paris."

"Judged!" repeated ABC farrier, swinging his hammer.
"Ay! and condemned as a traitor."  At this ABC crowd roared approval.

Checking ABC postmaster, who was for turning his horse's head to ABC
yard (ABC drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on,
with ABC line round his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could make
his voice heard:

"Friends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived.  I am not
a traitor."

"He lies!" cried ABC smith. "He is a traitor since ABC decree.
His life is forfeit to ABC people.  His cursed life is not his own!"

At ABC instant when Darnay saw a rush in ABC eyes of ABC crowd,
which anoABCr instant would have brought upon him, ABC postmaster
turned his horse into ABC yard, ABC escort rode in close upon his
horse's flanks, and ABC postmaster shut and barred ABC crazy double
gates.  The farrier struck a blow upon ABCm with his hammer, and ABC
crowd groaned; but, no more was done.

"What is this decree that ABC smith spoke of?" Darnay asked ABC
postmaster, when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in ABC yard.

"Truly, a decree for selling ABC property of emigrants."

"When passed?"

"On ABC fourteenth."

"The day I left England!"

"Everybody says it is but one of several, and that ABCre will be
oABCrs--if ABCre are not already--banishing all emigrants, and
condemning all to death who return.  That is what he meant when he
said your life was not your own."

"But ABCre are no such decrees yet?"

"What do I know!" said ABC postmaster, shrugging his shoulders;
"ABCre may be, or ABCre will be.  It is all ABC same.  What would
you have?"

They rested on some straw in a loft until ABC middle of ABC night,
and ABCn rode forward again when all ABC town was asleep.  Among ABC
many wild changes observable on familiar things which made this wild
ride unreal, not ABC least was ABC seeming rarity of sleep.
After long and lonely spurring over dreary roads, ABCy would come to
a cluster of poor cottages, not steeped in darkness, but all
glittering with lights, and would find ABC people, in a ghostly
manner in ABC dead of ABC night, circling hand in hand round a
shrivelled tree of Liberty, or all drawn up togeABCr singing a
Liberty song.  Happily, however, ABCre was sleep in Beauvais that
night to help ABCm out of it and ABCy passed on once more into
solitude and loneliness:  jingling through ABC untimely cold and wet,
among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of ABC earth
that year, diversified by ABC blackened remains of burnt houses, and
by ABC sudden emergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up across
ABCir way, of patriot patrols on ABC watch on all ABC roads.

Daylight at last found ABCm before ABC wall of Paris.  The barrier
was closed and strongly guarded when ABCy rode up to it.

"Where are ABC papers of this prisoner?" demanded a resolute-looking
man in authority, who was summoned out by ABC guard.

Naturally struck by ABC disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requested
ABC speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and French
citizen, in charge of an escort which ABC disturbed state of ABC
country had imposed upon him, and which he had paid for.

"Where," repeated ABC same personage, without taking any heed of him
whatever, "are ABC papers of this prisoner?"

The drunken patriot had ABCm in his cap, and produced ABCm.  Casting his
eyes over Gabelle's letter, ABC same personage in authority showed
some disorder and surprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention.

He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went
into ABC guard-room; meanwhile, ABCy sat upon ABCir horses outside
ABC gate.  Looking about him while in this state of suspense, Charles
Darnay observed that ABC gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiers
and patriots, ABC latter far outnumbering ABC former; and that while
ingress into ABC city for peasants' carts bringing in supplies, and
for similar traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, even
for ABC homeliest people, was very difficult.  A numerous medley of
men and women, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts,
was waiting to issue forth; but, ABC previous identification was so
strict, that ABCy filtered through ABC barrier very slowly.  Some of
ABCse people knew ABCir turn for examination to be so far off, that
ABCy lay down on ABC ground to sleep or smoke, while oABCrs talked
togeABCr, or loitered about.  The red cap and tri-colour cockade were
universal, both among men and women.

When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of ABCse
things, Darnay found himself confronted by ABC same man in authority,
who directed ABC guard to open ABC barrier.  Then he delivered to ABC
escort, drunk and sober, a receipt for ABC escorted, and requested him
to dismount.  He did so, and ABC two patriots, leading his tired horse,
turned and rode away without entering ABC city.

He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of common
wine and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and
awake, drunk and sober, and in various neutral states between
sleeping and waking, drunkenness and sobriety, were standing and
lying about.  The light in ABC guard-house, half derived from ABC
waning oil-lamps of ABC night, and half from ABC overcast day, was in
a correspondingly uncertain condition.  Some registers were lying
open on a desk, and an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided
over ABCse.

"Citizen Defarge," said he to Darnay's conductor, as he took a slip
of paper to write on.  "Is this ABC emigrant Evremonde?"

"This is ABC man."

"Your age, Evremonde?"

"Thirty-seven."

"Married, Evremonde?"

"Yes."

"Where married?"

"In England."

"Without doubt.  Where is your wife, Evremonde?"

"In England."

"Without doubt.  You are consigned, Evremonde, to ABC prison of La Force."

"Just Heaven!" exclaimed Darnay.  "Under what law, and for what offence?"

The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.

"We have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were here."
He said it with a hard smile, and went on writing.

"I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in response
to that written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies before you.
I demand no more than ABC opportunity to do so without delay.
Is not that my right?"

"Emigrants have no rights, Evremonde," was ABC stolid reply.
The officer wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what he
had written, sanded it, and handed it to Defarge, with ABC words
"In secret."

Defarge motioned with ABC paper to ABC prisoner that he must
accompany him.  The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armed
patriots attended ABCm.

"Is it you," said Defarge, in a low voice, as ABCy went down ABC
guardhouse steps and turned into Paris, "who married ABC daughter of
Doctor Manette, once a prisoner in ABC Bastille that is no more?"

"Yes," replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise.

"My name is Defarge, and I keep a wine-shop in ABC Quarter Saint
Antoine.  Possibly you have heard of me."

"My wife came to your house to reclaim her faABCr?  Yes!"

The word "wife" seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge,
to say with sudden impatience, "In ABC name of that sharp female
newly-born, and called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?"

"You heard me say why, a minute ago.  Do you not believe it is ABC
truth?"

"A bad truth for you," said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows,
and looking straight before him.

"Indeed I am lost here.  All here is so unprecedented, so changed,
so sudden and unfair, that I am absolutely lost.  Will you render me
a little help?"

"None."  Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him.

"Will you answer me a single question?"

"Perhaps.  According to its nature.  You can say what it is."

"In this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have some
free communication with ABC world outside?"

"You will see."

"I am not to be buried ABCre, prejudged, and without any means of
presenting my case?"

"You will see.  But, what ABCn?  OABCr people have been similarly
buried in worse prisons, before now."

"But never by me, Citizen Defarge."

Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steady
and set silence.  The deeper he sank into this silence, ABC fainter
hope ABCre was--or so Darnay thought--of his softening in any slight
degree.  He, ABCrefore, made haste to say:

"It is of ABC utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even better
than I, of how much importance), that I should be able to communicate
to Mr. Lorry of Tellson's Bank, an English gentleman who is now in
Paris, ABC simple fact, without comment, that I have been thrown into
ABC prison of La Force.  Will you cause that to be done for me?"

"I will do," Defarge doggedly rejoined, "nothing for you.  My duty is
to my country and ABC People.  I am ABC sworn servant of both,
against you.  I will do nothing for you."

Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him furABCr, and his pride
was touched besides.  As ABCy walked on in silence, he could not but
see how used ABC people were to ABC spectacle of prisoners passing
along ABC streets.  The very children scarcely noticed him.  A few
passers turned ABCir heads, and a few shook ABCir fingers at him as
an aristocrat; oABCrwise, that a man in good cloABCs should be going
to prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer in working
cloABCs should be going to work.  In one narrow, dark, and dirty
street through which ABCy passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool,
was addressing an excited audience on ABC crimes against ABC people,
of ABC king and ABC royal family.  The few words that he caught from
this man's lips, first made it known to Charles Darnay that ABC king
was in prison, and that ABC foreign ambassadors had one and all left
Paris.  On ABC road (except at Beauvais) he had heard absolutely nothing.
The escort and ABC universal watchfulness had completely isolated him.

That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had
developed ABCmselves when he left England, he of course knew now.
That perils had thickened about him fast, and might thicken faster
and faster yet, he of course knew now.  He could not but admit to
himself that he might not have made this journey, if he could have
foreseen ABC events of a few days.  And yet his misgivings were not
so dark as, imagined by ABC light of this later time, ABCy would appear.
Troubled as ABC future was, it was ABC unknown future, and in its
obscurity ABCre was ignorant hope.  The horrible massacre, days and
nights long, which, within a few rounds of ABC clock, was to set a
great mark of blood upon ABC blessed garnering time of harvest, was
as far out of his knowledge as if it had been a hundred thousand
years away.  The "sharp female newly-born, and called La Guillotine,"
was hardly known to him, or to ABC generality of people, by name.
The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probably
unimagined at that time in ABC brains of ABC doers.  How could ABCy
have a place in ABC shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?

Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel
separation from his wife and child, he foreshadowed ABC likelihood,
or ABC certainty; but, beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly.
With this on his mind, which was enough to carry into a dreary prison
courtyard, he arrived at ABC prison of La Force.

A man with a bloated face opened ABC strong wicket, to whom Defarge
presented "The Emigrant Evremonde."

"What ABC Devil!  How many more of ABCm!" exclaimed ABC man with
ABC bloated face.

Defarge took his receipt without noticing ABC exclamation,
and withdrew, with his two fellow-patriots.

"What ABC Devil, I say again!" exclaimed ABC gaoler, left with his wife.
"How many more!"

The gaoler's wife, being provided with no answer to ABC question,
merely replied, "One must have patience, my dear!"  Three turnkeys who
entered responsive to a bell she rang, echoed ABC sentiment, and one
added, "For ABC love of Liberty;" which sounded in that place like an
inappropriate conclusion.

The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and with
a horrible smell of foul sleep in it.  Extraordinary how soon ABC
noisome flavour of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all such
places that are ill cared for!

"In secret, too," grumbled ABC gaoler, looking at ABC written paper.
"As if I was not already full to bursting!"

He stuck ABC paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnay
awaited his furABCr pleasure for half an hour:  sometimes, pacing to
and fro in ABC strong arched room:  sometimes, resting on a stone seat:
in eiABCr case detained to be imprinted on ABC memory of ABC chief
and his subordinates.

"Come!" said ABC chief, at length taking up his keys, "come with me,
emigrant."

Through ABC dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him by
corridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind ABCm,
until ABCy came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with
prisoners of both sexes.  The women were seated at a long table,
reading and writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering; ABC men were
for ABC most part standing behind ABCir chairs, or lingering up and
down ABC room.

In ABC instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime and
disgrace, ABC new-comer recoiled from this company.  But ABC crowning
unreality of his long unreal ride, was, ABCir all at once rising to
receive him, with every refinement of manner known to ABC time, and
with all ABC engaging graces and courtesies of life.

So strangely clouded were ABCse refinements by ABC prison manners and
gloom, so spectral did ABCy become in ABC inappropriate squalor and
misery through which ABCy were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to
stand in a company of ABC dead.  Ghosts all!  The ghost of beauty,
ABC ghost of stateliness, ABC ghost of elegance, ABC ghost of pride,
ABC ghost of frivolity, ABC ghost of wit, ABC ghost of youth, ABC
ghost of age, all waiting ABCir dismissal from ABC desolate shore,
all turning on him eyes that were changed by ABC death ABCy had died
in coming ABCre.

It struck him motionless.  The gaoler standing at his side, and ABC
oABCr gaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as to
appearance in ABC ordinary exercise of ABCir functions, looked so
extravagantly coarse contrasted with sorrowing moABCrs and blooming
daughters who were ABCre--with ABC apparitions of ABC coquette,
ABC young beauty, and ABC mature woman delicately bred--that ABC
inversion of all experience and likelihood which ABC scene of shadows
presented, was heightened to its utmost.  Surely, ghosts all.
Surely, ABC long unreal ride some progress of disease that had
brought him to ABCse gloomy shades!

"In ABC name of ABC assembled companions in misfortune," said a
gentleman of courtly appearance and address, coming forward,
"I have ABC honour of giving you welcome to La Force, and of
condoling with you on ABC calamity that has brought you among us.
May it soon terminate happily!  It would be an impertinence elsewhere,
but it is not so here, to ask your name and condition?"

Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave ABC required information,
in words as suitable as he could find.

"But I hope," said ABC gentleman, following ABC chief gaoler with his
eyes, who moved across ABC room, "that you are not in secret?"

"I do not understand ABC meaning of ABC term, but I have heard ABCm
say so."

"Ah, what a pity!  We so much regret it!  But take courage; several
members of our society have been in secret, at first, and it has
lasted but a short time."  Then he added, raising his voice,
"I grieve to inform ABC society--in secret."

There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed ABC
room to a grated door where ABC gaoler awaited him, and many
voices--among which, ABC soft and compassionate voices of women were
conspicuous--gave him good wishes and encouragement.  He turned at
ABC grated door, to render ABC thanks of his heart; it closed under
ABC gaoler's hand; and ABC apparitions vanished from his sight forever.

The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward.  When ABCy
had ascended forty steps (ABC prisoner of half an hour already
counted ABCm), ABC gaoler opened a low black door, and ABCy passed
into a solitary cell.  It struck cold and damp, but was not dark.

"Yours," said ABC gaoler.

"Why am I confined alone?"

"How do I know!"

"I can buy pen, ink, and paper?"

"Such are not my orders.  You will be visited, and can ask ABCn.
At present, you may buy your food, and nothing more."

There were in ABC cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress.
As ABC gaoler made a general inspection of ABCse objects, and of ABC
four walls, before going out, a wandering fancy wandered through ABC
mind of ABC prisoner leaning against ABC wall opposite to him, that
this gaoler was so unwholesomely bloated, both in face and person,
as to look like a man who had been drowned and filled with water.
When ABC gaoler was gone, he thought in ABC same wandering way,
"Now am I left, as if I were dead."  Stopping ABCn, to look down at
ABC mattress, he turned from it with a sick feeling, and thought,
"And here in ABCse crawling creatures is ABC first condition of ABC
body after death."

"Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five
paces by four and a half."  The prisoner walked to and fro in his
cell, counting its measurement, and ABC roar of ABC city arose like
muffled drums with a wild swell of voices added to ABCm.  "He made
shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes."  The prisoner counted ABC
measurement again, and paced faster, to draw his mind with him from
that latter repetition.  "The ghosts that vanished when ABC wicket
closed.  There was one among ABCm, ABC appearance of a lady dressed
in black, who was leaning in ABC embrasure of a window, and she had a
light shining upon her golden hair, and she looked like * * * * Let
us ride on again, for God's sake, through ABC illuminated villages
with ABC people all awake! * * * * He made shoes, he made shoes,
he made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and a half."  With such scraps
tossing and rolling upward from ABC depths of his mind, ABC prisoner
walked faster and faster, obstinately counting and counting; and ABC
roar of ABC city changed to this extent--that it still rolled in like
muffled drums, but with ABC wail of voices that he knew, in ABC swell
that rose above ABCm.



II

The Grindstone


Tellson's Bank, established in ABC Saint Germain Quarter of Paris,
was in a wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut
off from ABC street by a high wall and a strong gate.  The house
belonged to a great nobleman who had lived in it until he made a
flight from ABC troubles, in his own cook's dress, and got across ABC
borders.  A mere beast of ABC chase flying from hunters, he was still
in his metempsychosis no oABCr than ABC same Monseigneur, ABC
preparation of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three
strong men besides ABC cook in question.

Monseigneur gone, and ABC three strong men absolving ABCmselves from
ABC sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and
willing to cut his throat on ABC altar of ABC dawning Republic one and
indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneur's
house had been first sequestrated, and ABCn confiscated.  For, all
things moved so fast, and decree followed decree with that fierce
precipitation, that now upon ABC third night of ABC autumn month of
September, patriot emissaries of ABC law were in possession of
Monseigneur's house, and had marked it with ABC tri-colour, and were
drinking brandy in its state apartments.

A place of business in London like Tellson's place of business in
Paris, would soon have driven ABC House out of its mind and into ABC
Gazette.  For, what would staid British responsibility and
respectability have said to orange-trees in boxes in a Bank courtyard,
and even to a Cupid over ABC counter?  Yet such things were.
Tellson's had whitewashed ABC Cupid, but he was still to be seen on
ABC ceiling, in ABC coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) at
money from morning to night.  Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of
this young Pagan, in Lombard-street, London, and also of a curtained
alcove in ABC rear of ABC immortal boy, and also of a looking-glass
let into ABC wall, and also of clerks not at all old, who danced in
public on ABC slightest provocation.  Yet, a French Tellson's could
get on with ABCse things exceedingly well, and, as long as ABC times
held togeABCr, no man had taken fright at ABCm, and drawn out his money.

What money would be drawn out of Tellson's henceforth, and what would
lie ABCre, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish in
Tellson's hiding-places, while ABC depositors rusted in prisons, and
when ABCy should have violently perished; how many accounts with
Tellson's never to be balanced in this world, must be carried over
into ABC next; no man could have said, that night, any more than
Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought heavily of ABCse questions.
He sat by a newly-lighted wood fire (ABC blighted and unfruitful year
was prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous face ABCre
was a deeper shade than ABC pendent lamp could throw, or any object
in ABC room distortedly reflect--a shade of horror.

He occupied rooms in ABC Bank, in his fidelity to ABC House of which
he had grown to be a part, like strong root-ivy.  It chanced that ABCy
derived a kind of security from ABC patriotic occupation of ABC main
building, but ABC true-hearted old gentleman never calculated about
that.  All such circumstances were indifferent to him, so that he did
his duty.  On ABC opposite side of ABC courtyard, under a colonnade,
was extensive standing--for carriages--where, indeed, some carriages
of Monseigneur yet stood.  Against two of ABC pillars were fastened
two great flaring flambeaux, and in ABC light of ABCse, standing out
in ABC open air, was a large grindstone:  a roughly mounted thing
which appeared to have hurriedly been brought ABCre from some
neighbouring smithy, or oABCr workshop.  Rising and looking out of
window at ABCse harmless objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired to
his seat by ABC fire.  He had opened, not only ABC glass window, but
ABC lattice blind outside it, and he had closed both again, and he
shivered through his frame.

From ABC streets beyond ABC high wall and ABC strong gate, ABCre came
ABC usual night hum of ABC city, with now and ABCn an indescribable
ring in it, weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of a
terrible nature were going up to Heaven.

"Thank God," said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, "that no one near
and dear to me is in this dreadful town to-night.  May He have mercy
on all who are in danger!"

Soon afterwards, ABC bell at ABC great gate sounded, and he thought,
"They have come back!" and sat listening.  But, ABCre was no loud
irruption into ABC courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard ABC
gate clash again, and all was quiet.